The Leadership Quarterly

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua

Review

A systematic review and critique of research on “healthy leadership”
Cort W. Rudolpha,⁎, Lauren D. Murphya, Hannes Zacherb
a Department of Psychology, Saint Louis University, St. Louis, MO, USA
b Institute of Psychology, Leipzig University, Leipzig, Germany

A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords:
Health
Wellbeing
Healthy leadership
Health-oriented leadership
Health-promoting leadership
Systematic review

A B S T R A C T

Employee health and wellbeing are important concerns for organizations, and it has long been known that social
support from leaders has a salutogenic influence on their followers. Over the past decade, several models of
“healthy leadership” have been introduced, with the aim of theoretically integrating leadership research with
scholarship on occupational health and wellbeing. We present a systematic review and critique of the literature
on these models of “healthy leadership” and associated evidence from empirical studies (k=35). In addition, we
compare various models of “healthy leadership” and critically evaluate evidence for their incremental predictive
validity above and beyond established leadership constructs (e.g., individualized consideration). We conclude
with a discussion of problems in the “healthy leadership” literature (e.g., construct proliferation, confounding of
leader behavior and its desired outcomes) and outline a “new agenda” of prescriptive recommendations for
“healthy leadership” theory (re)development, research, and practice.

Introduction

Ensuring high levels of employee health and wellbeing is an im-
portant concern for organizations. Healthier employees perform work
tasks more efficiently (Wright & Cropanzano, 2000), are less likely to
quit their jobs (Kramer & Son, 2016), are more likely to perform extra-
role behaviors (Ford, Cerasoli, Higgins, & Decesare, 2011), and are
more satisfied with their jobs (Faragher, Cass, & Cooper, 2013). Ad-
ditionally, it has long been known that social support has a salutogenic
influence on health and wellbeing (Halbesleben, 2006; Viswesvaran,
Sanchez, & Fisher, 1999), and this especially includes social support
from leaders (e.g., positive leader-member relations, see Harms, Credé,
Tynan, Leon, & Jeung, 2017; Kuoppala, Lamminpää, Liira, & Vainio,
2008; Montano, Reeske, Franke, & Hüffmeier, 2017). Until recently,
however, there have not been explicit theoretical models and empirical
studies that posit the influence of “healthy leadership” attitudes, values,
and behaviors on employee health and wellbeing.
To account for the health-specific influence of leaders on employee

health and wellbeing, scholars have introduced various models of
“healthy leadership” over the past decade (see Table 1). Health and
wellbeing are typically understood here, and within the “healthy lea-
dership” literature, to encompass physical, mental, and social well-
being, and not just the absence of disease (WHO, 2006). We use the
term “healthy leadership” broadly to refer to these health-related lea-
dership models and associated constructs, including health- and

wellbeing-specific leader attitudes (e.g., beliefs about the “value” of
health), values (e.g., prioritizing employee health), and/or behaviors
(e.g., communicating the importance of exercise or recovery).
In this article, we present a systematic review and critique of the

literature on “healthy leadership.” Although we review the entirety of
this literature, we particularly focus on health-promoting and health-
oriented leadership, as these concepts have received substantial atten-
tion, both empirically (see Table 2) and in terms of conceptual devel-
opment (e.g., Böhm, Baumgärtner, & Kreissner, 2016; Spiess & Stadler,
2016). Until now, such an effort has not been undertaken, particularly
one that contrasts these various models against one-another and criti-
cally evaluates evidence for their incremental predictive validity above
and beyond established leadership constructs (see also Akerjordet,
Furunes, & Haver, 2018).
Importantly, our review focuses specifically on “healthy leadership”

models, and not on research that has considered associations between
established leadership constructs (e.g., leader-member exchange
[LMX], transformational leadership) and employee health and well-
being (for reviews and meta-analyses, see Harms et al., 2017; Kuoppala
et al., 2008; Montano et al., 2017). We also do not consider relation-
ships between established leadership constructs and leader health and
wellbeing (for a meta-analysis, see Kaluza, Boer, Buengeler, & van Dick,
2019). However, to better understand the positioning of “healthy lea-
dership” among these established leadership frameworks, we do draw
conceptual parallels where relevant.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101335
Received 22 October 2018; Received in revised form 11 September 2019; Accepted 19 September 2019

⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: rudolphc@slu.edu (C.W. Rudolph).

The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101335

Available online 31 October 2019
1048-9843/ © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

T

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/10489843
https://www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101335
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101335
mailto:rudolphc@slu.edu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101335
http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101335&domain=pdf


The central arguments and contributions we offer are three-fold.
First, our review argues that because various “healthy leadership”
models have emerged in parallel, there is a great deal of theoretical and
empirical overlap between them to be noted and critically examined.
This observation raises questions about the possibility of construct
proliferation (Shaffer, DeGeest, & Li, 2016), and we suggest ways to
address this issue in future research. Second, consistent with recent
criticisms of the transformational leadership literature (see Van
Knippenberg & Sitkin, 2013), we propose that research on “healthy
leadership” confounds actual leadership behavior with its intended
outcomes of employee health and wellbeing. Defining and measuring
“healthy leadership” in terms of its beneficial effects on these outcomes
is problematic, because it does not allow valid conclusions regarding
the effectiveness of this form of leadership behavior. Finally, we ques-
tion and critically examine whether theoretical and empirical research
has sufficiently addressed the issue of the incremental validity (see
Antonakis, 2017) of “healthy leadership” for predicting employee
health and wellbeing.
To frame these arguments, our paper is organized around four

specific and interrelated goals. First, we begin by introducing the
background and potential importance of “healthy leadership,” and by
describing various “healthy leadership” constructs that can be found in
the literature. Second, we further explore “healthy leadership” con-
ceptualizations by comparing and contrasting common and unique
predictions made by these various models. Third, we present a sys-
tematic and critical literature review of empirical (quantitative and
qualitative) studies on “healthy leadership.” Finally, we outline an in-
tegrative research agenda that offers prescriptive recommendations for
“healthy leadership” theory development, future research, and practice.

Review of “healthy leadership” models and constructs

There is evidence that work environments are increasingly experi-
enced as stressful by employees. For example, job demands have in-
creased over time, particularly cognitive demands associated with
knowledge jobs (National Academy of Sciences, 1999). To address this
issue, organizations have dedicated quite a bit of attention toward
systems that support employee health and wellbeing (e.g., Richardson,
2017; Tetrick & Winslow, 2015). Such systems can take many forms,
from more tangible formal policies and benefits to less tangible forms of
social support. One particularly important source of such support is
one's immediate supervisor. The imperative of organizations and lea-
ders to support their employees' health and wellbeing is a key compo-
nent of their “duty of care.” For employees, maintaining high levels of
health and wellbeing is an important factor in their long-term em-
ployability (Berntson & Marklund, 2007).
Often citing the shortcomings of established leadership models with

regard to these trends, “healthy leadership” models seek to add to our
ability to explain and make predictions about how leaders influence the
health and wellbeing of their followers. For example, Franke, Vincent,
and Felfe (2011) motivate the development of their health-oriented
leadership measure by suggesting that established models of leadership,
such as transformational leadership, are “too vague about specific
health-related actions of leaders” (p. 140). Next, we describe health-
promoting and health-oriented leadership, two dominant “healthy
leadership” concepts found in the literature. We additionally describe a
number of related conceptualizations that appear less frequently in this
literature, but that also address core themes of “healthy leadership.”
Table 1 summarizes these various “healthy leadership” constructs, their

Table 1
“Healthy leadership” constructs, definitions, and relevant citations.

Construct Definition Citation

Health-promoting leadership “…creating a culture for health-promoting workplaces and values that inspire and motivate
employees to participate in such a development.” (p. 17)

Eriksson (2011)

Health-oriented leadership Leader's values toward and awareness of their follower's health, and behaviors such as effective
health-related communication and the design of health-promoting working conditions.

Franke and Felfe (2011)

Health- and development-promoting
leadership

“…leaders' direct impact on the demands, task requirements and resources of their employees.” (p.
42)

Vincent (2012a, 2012b)

Health-specific leadership “Health-specific leadership is conceptualized as the leader's explicit consideration of and
engagement in employee health.” (p. 108)

Gurt et al. (2011)

Healthy leadership “...a style of humane and relationship-oriented leading with focus on the subjective well-being of
employees and managers” (p. 1)

Jiménez et al. (2013)

Leadership support for health
promotion

“Business alignment with health promotion objectives, awareness of the health-productivity link,
worksite support for health promotion, and leadership support for health promotion.” (p. 359)

Della et al. (2008)

Organizational leadership for health
promotion

“A multidimensional process in which members, across multiple levels, exert influence on: 1. The
development of health promotion (HP) objectives and action strategies for the improvement of
community health, 2. the implementation of action strategies to achieve community heart health
objectives, 3. organizational practices that strengthen group involvement and commitment to
ongoing HP efforts, and 4. the development of a learning culture that sustains up-to-date HP actions
and effective community interaction by the organization.” (pp. 197–198)

Barrett et al. (2005)

Salutogenic leadership Leadership behavior that involves building trust, managing problems, and reducing work-related
pressure faced by subordinates

Eberz and Antoni (2018)

Health-promoting managerial work “...managers' evidence-based knowledge of health-promoting psychosocial work conditions, as well
as their capability to apply, adapt, and craft sustainable managerial work practices.” (p. 1)

Dellve and Eriksson (2017)

Health-promoting leadership conditions “...the provision of feedback about the leaders' efforts to create health-promoting working
conditions in seven key aspects: health awareness, workload, control, reward, community, fairness
and value-fit” (p. 1)

Jiménez, Winkler, and
Bregenzer (2017)

Individual leadership for health
promotion

“...individual leadership behaviours as well as individuals' perceptions of different aspects of
organizational leadership, but in relation to themselves only.” (p. 4) Including: “individual actions
characteristic of ongoing learning and reflection, and characteristic of leaders (i.e. reflective
practices and professional development); and organizational practices and characteristics which
foster individual leadership for health promotion (i.e. opportunity for change, skills and work
conditions).” (p.4)

Anderson et al. (2005)

Health leadership “Healthy leadership is usually understood as direct leadership behavior and less as a general
controlling function of structural leadership. Thus, healthy leadership focusses on personal
leadership, which is practiced and lived by executives - or not. Healthy leadership does not focus
solely on employee leadership: Healthy leadership starts with one's own self in the form of self-
management.”

Möltner et al. (2016)

Health-focused leadership Leader's behavior that protects, enhances and restores the health of employees. Böhm and Baumgärtner (2016)

C.W. Rudolph, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101335

2



Table 2
Summary of the k=35 studies of “healthy leadership” included in the literature review.

Citation Method Design Measure Incremental? Study context (country; industry) Sample description (sample size; position
description)

Relevant outcome(s)

Health-promoting leadership
Gurt and Elke (2009) Quant 2-wave CP

survey
OHSQ No Germany; Government n=265 tax administration employees Follower strain

Törnblom (2012) Quant CS survey HDPLA Yes Sweden; government n=346 county council employees Follower self-reported health
Andersson and Dafteke

(2014)
Quant CS survey CPQ No Sweden; healthcare n= 63 healthcare employees Follower self-reported health

Winkler et al. (2014) Quant CS survey Ad-hoc Yes Germany; low-skilled industries n= 474 foodservice and manufacturing
employees; n= 35 leaders

Follower wellbeing, job satisfaction, emotional
exhaustion, & psychosomatic complaints

Adler et al. (2017) Quant CS survey Adapted Yes United States; military n=344 active duty and reserve U.S. service
members deployed in Afghanistan

Follower burnout, PTSD symptoms, & perceived stressors

Jiménez and Dunkl (2015) Quant CS survey HPLC No Study 1: unclear country, convenience
sample; study 2: Austria, convenience
sample

Study 1: n=430, various positions; study 2:
n=233, various positions

Follower stress-related recovery & work engagement

Dunkl et al. (2015) Quant CS survey HPLC No Slovenia; convenience sample n=212 employees; various positions Follower perceived stress & recovery
Bregenzer et al. (2015) Quant 2-wave IP

survey
HPLC No Unclear country; convenience sample n=98 employees; various positions Follower perceived stress, recovery, & burnout

Jiménez, Winkler, and
Dunkl (2017)

Quant CS survey HPLC; HoL No Austria; government n=299 leaders from the Austrian economic
chamber

Leader recovery, perceived stress, & burnout

Jiménez, Winkler, and
Bregenzer (2017)

Quant CS survey HPLC; HoL No Austria; multiple industries and a
convenience sample

n=430 employees from commerce and
education organizations, and others with no
position description provided

Follower perceived stress, recovery, & burnout

Jiménez, Bregenzer, Kallus,
et al. (2017)

Quant CS survey HPLC No Austria; convenience sample Two samples (n=228 employees; n=263
employees); Various positions

Follower perceived stress, recovery, & burnout

Eriksson et al. (2010) Qual INT N/A No Sweden; government n= 15 municipal leaders Leader plans to analyze sickness rates and work
attendance

Juhlin (2012) Qual INT N/A No Unclear country; unclear organizational
sample

n=4 leaders; No position description provided Leader's recognition that their actions have health-related
consequences for their followers

Winkler et al. (2013) Qual INT N/A No Various countries; various low-skilled
industries

n=53 employees from low-skilled industries
(e.g., cleaning staff; workers in a poultry
production facility)

Follower's understanding of the connection between their
leader's behavior and their own health

Pärlemyr (2017) Qual INT N/A No Unclear country; service, manufacturing,
and development industries

n=5 private sector leaders Leader's recognition that their actions have health-related
consequences for their followers

Furunes et al. (2018) Qual INT N/A No Unclear country; healthcare n=12 community homecare nurses Follower's understanding of the connection between their
leader's behavior and their own health

Health-oriented leadership
Franke and Felfe (2011) Quant 2-wave IP

survey
HoL No Unclear country; financial services,

administration, education and health care
industries

n=74 leaders and n=459 followers; no position
description provided

Follower irritation & somatic complaints

Franke et al. (2014) Quant 2-wave IP
survey

HoL Yes Study 1: Germany, various industries;
study 2: Germany, various industries

Study 1: n=535, no position description
provided; study 2: n=383, no position
description provided

Follower health status, irritation, & health complaints

Kranabetter and Niessen
(2017)

Quant CS survey HoL Yes Unclear country; financial & healthcare
industries

n=87 leaders and n=453 followers from two
organizations; no position description provided

Follower exhaustion & cynicism

Santa Maria et al. (2018) Quant CS survey HoL No Germany; public safety n=811 police officers Follower physical complaints, burnout, depression, &
wellbeing

Köppe et al. (2018) Quant 2-wave IP
survey

HoL No Germany; convenience sample n=106 leaders and followers; various positions Follower somatic health complaints

Kranabetter and Niessen
(2016)

Qual INT N/A No Unclear country; convenience sample n=50 leaders; various positions Follower exhaustion

Health- and development-promoting leadership
Vincent (2011) Quant CS survey HDPLA Yes Unclear country; convenience sample n= 1278 employees; various positions Follower irritation, emotional exhaustion, psychosomatic

complaints, & work ability

(continued on next page)

C
.W
.
R
udolph,

et
al.

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101335

3



Table 2 (continued)

Citation Method Design Measure Incremental? Study context (country; industry) Sample description (sample size; position
description)

Relevant outcome(s)

Vincent (2012a) Quant CS survey HDPLA No Germany; convenience sample n=1322 followers; various positions Follower work engagement, irritation, & emotional
exhaustion

Vincent (2012b) Quant CS survey HDPLA Yes Germany; convenience sample n=822; various positions Follower irritation, emotional exhaustion, &
psychosomatic health complaints

Rigotti et al. (2014) Quant 2-wave IP
survey

HDPLA Yes Germany, Sweden, & Finland; various
industries

Study 1: n=119 followers, various positions;
study 2: n=131 leaders and n=1006 followers,
various positions

Follower wellbeing, job satisfaction, emotional
exhaustion, & psychosomatic complaints

Additional “healthy leadership” models
Gurt et al. (2011) Quant CS survey OHSQ No Germany; government n=1027 tax administration employees Follower job satisfaction & strain
Horstmann (2018) Quant CS survey HoL Yes Study 1: Germany, healthcare; study 2:

Germany, healthcare
Study 1: n=861 employees of geriatric nursing
homes; study 2: n=524 employees of geriatric
nursing homes

Follower health complaints & burnout

Möltner et al. (2016) Quant CS survey HoL No Unclear country; convenience sample n=211 leaders; various positions Leader mindfulness & positive health cultures
Milner et al. (2013) Quant CS survey LBE No South Africa; various industries n=11,472 employees; various positions Follower stress-related recovery & work engagement
Hoert (2014) Quant CS survey LBE No United States; financial service, higher

education, & retail
n=621; various positions Follower job satisfaction, job stress, employee

engagement, health-related behaviors, & participation in
wellness programs

Barrett et al. (2007) Quant CS survey OLHP No Canada; healthcare n= 158; various positions Follower physiological, behavioral, and psychosocial risk
factors, environmental conditions, nutrition, tobacco
reduction, & physical activity

Axewill (2013) Qual INT N/A No Unclear country; primary education n= 6 preschool managers Follower attendance rates
Eberz and Antoni (2018) Quant CS survey TIMP Yes Unclear country; criminal justice & human

services
Two samples: n= 333 & n=384; various
positions

Follower sense of coherence

Dellve and Eriksson (2017) Mixed INT & CS
survey

N/A No Unclear country; healthcare n=64 leaders; various positions Follower job satisfaction & vitality

Note. Quant= quantitative; Qual= qualitative; Mixed=mixed methods; CP= complete panel; IP= incomplete panel; CS= cross sectional; INT= interview; Measure=measure of “healthy leadership”;
Incremental=Does study provide evidence for incremental validity?; HDPLA=Health and Development Promoting Leadership Analysis (Vincent, 2010, 2012a, 2012b); HoL=Health Oriented Leadership Scale (Franke
et al., 2014; Franke & Felfe, 2011); OHSQ=Organizational Health and Safety Questionnaire (Gurt et al., 2010); CPQ=Copenhagen Psychosocial Questionnaire (Kristensen, Hannerz, Hogh, & Borg, 2005);
HPLC=Health-Promoting Leadership Conditions (Jiménez & Dunkl, 2015); LBE= Leading by Example (Della et al., 2008); OLHP=Organizational Leadership for Health Promotion (Barrett et al., 2005); TIMP=Trust,
Incident Management and Pressure Inventory (Eberz & Antoni, 2018); Ad-Hoc= ad-hoc battery of measures, created for this study (i.e., which do not readily map onto other “healthy leadership” measures considered
here); Adapted= adapted measure (i.e., which does not readily map onto other “healthy leadership” measures considered here).

C
.W
.
R
udolph,

et
al.

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101335

4



Table 3
Summary of various “healthy leadership” measures considered in our literature review.

Measure Citation(s) Construct(s) Description & relevant example item(s) Validity Reliability Dimensionality Perspective

Copenhagen Psychosocial
Questionnaire (CPQ)

Kristensen et al.
(2005)

Health promoting
leadership

A measure comprised of 30 different sub-
scales assessing features of the psychosocial
work environment, including “quality of
leadership”
Example item - quality of leadership: “To
what extent would you say that your
immediate superior is good at work
planning?”

Correlations among CPQ sub-scales
are provided; no external criteria are
considered

Internal Consistency
(α=0.61 to 0.93)

Factor analytic evidence
suggests overlap between
certain sub-scales and measures
of functional health

Follower
Reports

Health and development
promoting leadership
Analysis (HDPLA)

Vincent (2010)
Vincent
(2012a, 2012b)

Health and
development
promoting leadership
Health promoting
leadership

Measure designed to assess three underlying
higher-order dimensions of health and
development promoting leadership (i.e.,
demanding, development-oriented and
support-oriented leadership)
Example item - clarity: “My leader takes care
of clear task assignments and
responsibilities”
Example item - feedback: “My leader gives
me regular feedback on my work results”

Evidence for convergent/divergent
and criterion-related validity are
provided in the form of zero-order
correlations and multiple regression
models

Internal Consistency
(α=0.77 to 0.92)

Factor analytic evidence
supports the three-factor
dimensionality of this index

Follower
Reports

Health oriented leadership
scale (HoL)

Franke and
Felfe (2011)
Franke et al.
(2014)
Franke et al.
(2015)

Health oriented
leadership
Health promoting
leadership
Health specific
leadership
Healthy leadership

Measures designed to capture three
dimensions of health oriented leadership
(i.e., awareness, value, and behaviors) in
terms of both “self care” and “staff care”
Example item - leader “self care”: “I notice
immediately if something is wrong with my
health”
Example item - leader “staff care”: “I notice
immediately when something is wrong with
my employees”
Example item - follower perceived “staff
care”: “My supervisor will know
immediately if something is wrong with me”

Correlations between HoL and
external measures of job
characteristics criteria (e.g., task
content) are reported

Internal Consistency
(α=0.68 to 0.88)

Factor analytic evidence
supports the six-factor
dimensionality of this index

Leader &
follower
reports

Health-promoting leadership
conditions (HPLC)

Jiménez &
Dunkl et al.
(2015)

Health promoting
leadership

A measure designed to capture health
promoting leadership strategies that support
healthy working conditions
Example item - health awareness: “As a
leader I take care that the health of all
employees is promoted”

Correlations between HPLC and
external measures of stress and
recovery are reported

No reliability
information provided

No factor analytic evidence
provided

Follower
Reports

Leading by example (LBE) Della et al.
(2008)

Leadership support for
health promotion

A measure designed to assess dimensions of
management support for worksite health
promotion
Example item: “Our leaders view the level of
employee health and wellbeing as one
important indicator of the site's business
success”

Content validity assessed via SMEs Internal consistency
(α=0.61 to 0.82)

Factor analytic evidence
supports the four-factor
dimensionality of this index

Follower
reports

Organizational Health and
Safety Questionnaire
(OHSQ)

Gurt et al.
(2010)

Health promoting
leadership
Health specific
leadership

A measure designed to assess general
healthy leadership behaviors and the
engagement in health promotion of the
leader.
Example item - task related: “My supervisor
routinely discusses with me which
objectives are to be accomplished
concerning workplace health promotion”)
Example item - relationship related: “My

Correlations between OHSQ external
measures of irritation, complaints,
and job satisfaction are reported

Internal Consistency
(α=0.32 to 0.88);
test-retest (rxy= 0.38
to 0.92)

No factor analytic evidence
provided

Leader &
Follower
reports

(continued on next page)

C
.W
.
R
udolph,

et
al.

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101335

5



Table 3 (continued)

Measure Citation(s) Construct(s) Description & relevant example item(s) Validity Reliability Dimensionality Perspective

supervisor assumes responsibility for my
health”

Organizational Leadership
for Health Promotion
(OLHP)

Barrett et al.
(2005)

Organizational
leadership for health
promotion

A measure designed to assess four
dimensions of organizational leadership for
health promotion (i.e., practices for
organizational learning, wellness planning,
workplace milieu, and organizational
member development)
Example item - wellness planning: “Policies,
programs, and budgets reflect the values
and principles of the wellness model”

Content validity assessed via SMEs Internal consistency
(α=0.79 to 0.91)

Dimensionality explored
through principal components
analysis

Follower
reports

Trust, Incident Management
and Pressure Inventory
(TIMP)

Eberz and
Antoni (2018)

Salutogenic leadership A measure designed to assess three
dimensions of salutogenic leadership (i.e.,
trust, incident management and pressure)
Example item - trust: “My direct supervisor
leaves a great deal of room for decision-
making and design”

Evidence for convergent/divergent
and criterion-related validity are
provided in the form of zero-order
correlations and multiple regression
models

Internal Consistency
(α=0.72 to 0.90)

Factor analytic evidence
supports the three-factor
dimensionality of this index

Follower
Reports

Note. Although other measures of “healthy leadership” exist (e.g., Anderson et al., 2005), this table summarizes those used in studies included in our review. Citation(s)= citation(s) associated with initial scale
development. Construct(s)= constructs operationalized by scales in reviewed studies. Validity= evidence offered for validity, Reliability= evidence offered for reliability, Dimensionality= evidence offered for
dimensionality, Perspective=measure taken from leader- or follower-reported perspective. All scales were originally designed purposefully as measures of “healthy leadership,” with the exception of the CPQ.

C
.W
.
R
udolph,

et
al.

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101335

6



definitions, and relevant citations. We trace the development of these
models and constructs and critically discuss attempts to quantify them
via the development of measurement instruments (see Table 3).

Health-promoting leadership

Much of the early work on “healthy leadership” emerged from the
public health and health-promotion literatures from Scandinavian/
Nordic Countries. An early conceptualization termed health-promoting
leadership is attributed to Hanson (2004), who identified three core
dimensions: personal leadership (i.e., leaders' provision of support, re-
cognition, and feedback), pedagogical leadership (i.e., balancing the
promotion of follower wellbeing against organizational goals), and
strategic health-promoting leadership (i.e., leaders' actions toward de-
veloping and implementing strategies to foster a “healthy workplace”).
Integrating Hanson's (2004) ideas, Eriksson (2011, p.17) refined and

clarified the definition of health-promoting leadership, suggesting that
it “… concerns itself with creating a culture for health-promoting
workplaces and values that inspire and motivate employees to partici-
pate in such a development.” Eriksson et al. (2011) identified three
components of health-promoting leadership, including having a sup-
portive leadership style, organizing health-promoting activities, and
developing a health-promoting workplace, which could be roughly
mapped onto the three aspects of health-promoting leadership proposed
by Hanson (2004). Eriksson et al. (2011) also suggests various motives
for the development of health-promoting leadership (e.g., improved
health, reducing costs). A number of “critical conditions” for the suc-
cessful enactment of health-promoting leadership were also proposed,
including organizational conditions (e.g., financial resources), leader-
specific characteristics (e.g., attitudes about health, skills in health
promotion), and support afforded to leaders themselves (e.g., structural
conditions that free leaders' time to promote follower wellbeing).
Research concerning health-promoting leadership has frequently

adopted qualitative methods. That said, there have been various at-
tempts to develop psychometric instruments to quantify aspects of
health-promoting leadership (e.g Jiménez, Winkler, & Dunkl, 2017).
Arguing that previous models have adopted an approach that is too
leader-centric (i.e., they focus too much attention on the “individual
level of leadership,” p. 7), Jiménez, Bregenzer, Kallus, Fruhwirth, and
Wagner-Hartl (2017) sought to expand the concept to include leader-
ship strategies that support and enhance healthy workplaces. Jiménez,
Bregenzer, Kallus, et al. (2017) further suggests that this is important,
because healthy working environments are optimally understood by the
interaction of individual and organizational factors. According to this
model, there are seven unique elements that comprise a healthy
workplace culture (i.e., health awareness, value-fit, fairness, commu-
nity, reward, control, and low workload). It is suggested that these
seven elements are organized as a circumplex, with health-promoting
leadership as its “core.” Of note, this model has not, to our knowledge,
ever been operationalized with this circumplex structure.
In developing their measure of health-promoting leadership,

Jiménez, Bregenzer, Kallus, et al. (2017) translated this model into six
dimensions of “work life” borrowed from previous work by Maslach
and Leiter (2008). Additionally, one dimension that maps onto “health
awareness” is said to reflect “health-promoting leadership conditions.”
Considering item content, only this “health awareness” dimension
really captures leader behavior specific to health promotion. Somewhat
consistent with the motivation to “balance” individual and organiza-
tional factors, the other six dimensions more readily capture elements
of the perceived work environment (e.g., fairness) or elements of job
design (e.g., perceived control). Although it would be hard to argue that
such elements are not important for health and wellbeing at work in
general, only the three items of this scale from the “health awareness”
dimension map specifically to leaders' actions. Moreover, although
Jiménez, Bregenzer, Kallus, et al. (2017) argue that healthy working
environments are best conceptualized as the interaction of the

individual (i.e., leader) and these organizational factors captured by
this scale, no specific guidance is given for how to use this scale to
account for such interactions, and no studies that we identified in our
review have explicitly modeled such interactive relationships.
Taking a broader view, the important thing to note about this scale,

particularly when contrasting its implied dimensionality and item
content against the models of health-promoting leadership described
above (i.e., Eriksson, 2011; Hanson, 2004), is the absence of overlap
between the theoretical models and the way that health-promoting
leadership is measured. Drawing parallels between these scales and
their (implied) underlying theory requires a large inferential leap in
many cases. For example, it is hard to rationalize the argument that a
theory designed to explain leaders' behavior is too leader-centric
(Jiménez, Bregenzer, Kallus, et al., 2017). This is actually a symptom of
a larger concern, in that to some extent, the status of “health-promoting
leadership” suffers from confusion over construct labeling. Indeed,
many models and operationalizations share this common label, but
their underlying content is far less aligned than their similar names
would suggest (Kelley, 1927).

Health-oriented leadership

At the same time that the model of health-promoting leadership was
emerging, the concept of health-oriented leadership was explored em-
pirically by Franke and Felfe (2011). In contrast to the model of health-
promoting leadership described above, the model of health-oriented
leadership was developed by a largely deductive process. According to
Franke and Felfe (2011), health-oriented leadership deviates from es-
tablished and more general leadership models in that it addresses
specific aspects of leaders' communication and the health-promoting
design of working conditions, as well as leaders' values and their
awareness of followers' health. The measure of health-oriented leader-
ship also serves to assess followers' health-oriented values, awareness,
and behavior, with components of health-oriented leadership re-
presenting health-oriented leadership behavior, health-related aware-
ness, self-efficacy, attitudes, and values.
Unpacking this definition further, health-oriented leadership beha-

viors can be described both in terms of those related to communication
or direct interaction between leaders and followers, from the followers'
perspective, and in terms of behaviors that consider the health-con-
scious design of working processes and maintenance of healthy working
conditions. A heuristic model of the process by which health-oriented
leadership influences follower health and wellbeing was developed by
Franke, Ducki, and Felfe (2015) (see also Franke, 2012). This model is
pseudo-ecological in its nature, describing the influence of health-or-
iented leadership across different levels of analysis, between leaders'
and subordinates' perceptions and behaviors. It depicts a “house of
health-promoting leadership.” The “foundation” of this house is com-
prised of leaders' “self care,” or the way leaders deal with their own
health, including how they think, feel, and act in relation to their own
health. Moving up one level, leaders' “self care” influences how they
role model health to their followers (i.e., “staff care”). “Staff care” in-
volves the perceived manifestation of leaders' values, awareness, and
behaviors as recognized by their followers; for example, followers'
perceptions that it is important to their leader to actively reduce health
risks and that their leader notices when something is wrong with their
health. “Staff care,” in turn, influences how followers manage their own
health (i.e., “self care”). Health and wellbeing are depicted on the “top
floor” of the house, with the assumption that leaders' “self care” posi-
tively influences followers' “self care” through “staff care.”
Franke and Felfe (2011) developed a measure of health-oriented

leadership in German. An English version of this scale is provided by
Franke, Felfe, and Pundt (2014). Adding ambiguity, Franke et al.
(2014) inexplicably relabeled their translated version of this measure as
an index of health-promoting leadership. To avoid confusion in our re-
view, we characterize all studies using either version of this scale as

C.W. Rudolph, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101335

7



health-oriented leadership. The scale captures the components of health-
oriented leadership described above, as well as health-related attitudes
and values. The health-oriented leadership scale can capture either
leader-reported self-assessments (i.e., “self care” and “staff care” from
the leader's perspective) or external assessments completed by followers
(i.e., “staff care,” as described above, from the follower's perspective);
often, however, only one of these forms is used in research. Feasibly, for
any given component of health-oriented leadership (e.g., health-related
awareness) one could obtain scores on leaders' “self care,” leaders' “staff
care,” and their followers' perceived “staff care.”
Because the health-oriented leadership model and its associated

measurement instrument potentially account for perceived leader and
follower values, awareness, and behaviors, it is feasible to hypothesize
and test reciprocal dyadic leader-follower relationships. Despite this,
because the model only specifies simple (i.e., unconditional) associa-
tions (e.g., association between “staff care” and follower health and
wellbeing), it is unclear how such dyadic effects would emerge or de-
velop over time. This is especially true given that single time point,
common source methodologies (i.e., typically follower reports of “staff
care”) are most typically used to study associations between health-
oriented leadership and follower outcomes.

Additional “healthy leadership” models

Although the models of health-promoting and health-oriented lea-
dership are by far the most commonly cited models of “healthy lea-
dership,” there are a number of related models that appear less fre-
quently within this literature. Despite their relatively low prevalence,
these models are important to note because they have served as a basis
for the empirical study of “healthy leadership,” and because they ex-
emplify the proliferation of constructs in this space. Table 1 provides
definitions of each of these constructs, and we next review them each
briefly.
One early construct, organizational leadership for health promotion

(Barrett, Plotnikoff, Raine, & Anderson, 2005), should not be confused
with the similarly-named, yet less often studied individual leadership for
health promotion construct (i.e., Anderson, Plotnikoff, Raine, & Barrett,
2005, see Table 1). Described as a multidimensional and ecological
system of actions, organizational leadership for health promotion in-
volves various processes of health promotion, from goal setting to im-
plementation, with an emphasis on continuous development. Barrett
et al. (2005) developed a measure of organizational leadership for
health promotion, which assesses four dimensions, including “practices
for organizational learning,” “wellness planning,” “workplace milieu,”
and “organizational member development.” Importantly, none of the
items that reflect these dimensions address leadership behaviors or
styles per se. Confusing matters further, this construct is often inter-
changeably labeled as “leadership for heart health promotion;” how-
ever, no references to cardiovascular functioning are explicitly made
(see Barrett et al., 2005).
Della, DeJoy, Goetzel, Ozminkowski, and Wilson (2008) introduced

the concept of management support for worksite health promotion, which
includes, among other aspects, leadership support for health promotion.
The “leading by example” instrument, an index designed to capture
different aspects of management support for worksite health promo-
tion, includes three items that purport to capture leadership support for
health promotion from the followers' perspective. This index has by-
and-large been used descriptively, for example, to document changes to
workplace health promotion efforts over time (e.g., Della et al., 2010).
Beyond follower perceptions, the concept of health-specific leadership

(Gurt, Schwennen, & Elke, 2011) is described as a distinct set of lea-
dership behaviors that influence employee health. These behaviors in-
clude responsibility for employee health, communication about health-
related topics, or setting agendas for workplace health promotion. The
logic is that, by highlighting the importance of health, leaders are able
to influence their followers' health. To operationalize health-specific

leadership, Gurt et al. (2011) use the organizational health and safety
questionnaire (Gurt, Uhle, & Schwennen, 2010), which assesses both
general and health-specific forms of leadership from the follower's
perspective, in terms of both task and relationship-related leadership
behaviors.
Vincent (2012a, 2012b) offers a model of health- and development-

promoting leadership, which is defined by high levels of support and
development-related leadership behaviors, and low levels of demanding
leadership behaviors (i.e., leadership behaviors that overwhelm fol-
lowers). To help explain the mechanisms through which leaders affect
followers' wellbeing, Vincent (2012b) developed a measure of health-
and development-promoting leadership behavior, the health- and de-
velopment-friendly leadership analysis, which assesses followers' per-
ceptions of leader behavior that have an influence on follower job de-
mands, task requirements, and resources.
Jiménez and colleagues have developed a measure of health-pro-

moting leadership behaviors (i.e., health-promoting leadership condi-
tions; Jiménez, Bregenzer, Kallus, et al., 2017). In addition to this,
earlier work by Jiménez has conceptualized a “healthy leadership”
style, which refers to “… humane and relationship-oriented leading
with [sic] focus on the subjective well-being of employees and man-
agers” (Jiménez, Dunkl, Hofer, & Vogrincic, 2013, p. 1). Although
conceptualized as a unique style of leadership, “healthy leadership” is
measured by Jiménez et al. (2013) with a scale of attitudes and beha-
viors regarding “healthy leadership” (i.e., health-relevant leadership
dimensions; Jiménez & Winkler, 2011).
More recently, Dellve and Eriksson (2017) offered a model of health-

promoting managerial work, defined as evidence-based knowledge of
health-promoting psychosocial work conditions, as well as the cap-
ability to apply, adapt, and craft sustainable work practices. This sys-
tems-based model was developed to support the design and im-
plementation of training programs to support leaders' enactment of
workplace health promotion programs.
Finally, the concept of salutogenic leadership derives from the sys-

temic salutogenic interaction model (SSIM; Eberz & Antoni, 2016). The
SSIM aims to extend earlier work on health-oriented leadership by
developing a holistic framework in which health-promoting interac-
tions are the focus, and where dynamics in such interactions are af-
fected both by leaders and followers. Eberz and Antoni (2016) argue
that such interactions are neglected by health-oriented leadership
models, and that the reciprocal influences between follower health and
leader health must be accounted for. Additionally, the SSIM suggests
that a sense of coherence (i.e., the comprehensibility, manageability,
and significance placed on the experience of stressors; see Antonovsky,
1987) is the mechanism by which health-supportive leadership exerts
its positive influence, and that the effect of such leadership is bound by
contextual factors and the health-promoting interactions between lea-
ders and their subordinates. To complement the SSIM, Eberz and Antoni
(2018) developed the trust, incident management, and pressure (TIMP)
inventory as an index of the core facets of salutogenic leadership.

Comparison of different “healthy leadership” theoretical frameworks

Given the number and diversity of “healthy leadership” models, it is
difficult to make absolute comparisons. These models have each been
developed using different methods, and for different reasons and pur-
poses. That said, there are some common, either explicit or implicit,
assumptions present across these models. In terms of explicit assump-
tions, each of these models of “healthy leadership” claims that there are
observable differences in leaders' values, attitudes, and/or behaviors
that support follower health and wellbeing. Across models it is assumed
that it is possible to improve these values, attitudes, and behaviors.
Corollary to this, it is assumed that developing “healthy leadership” is
important for workplace health promotion. Finally, “healthy leader-
ship” is assumed to be a meso-level component of health promotion,
which serves as a “bridge” between organizational-level health

C.W. Rudolph, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101335

8



promotion policies and practices and individual-level (i.e., follower)
health and wellbeing. Although some models of “healthy leadership”
posit a reciprocal relationship between leaders and followers that is
mutually beneficial (see Eberz & Antoni, 2016; Franke & Felfe, 2011),
this idea is less universal across models, and as we will see from our
review, is rarely if ever rigorously tested.
Considering these common explicit assumptions, it should be clear

that there is a great deal of conceptual overlap between models of
“healthy leadership.” The co-occurrence of so many similar models
within this literature is concerning, particularly if they are assumed to
operate independently of one-another (Kelley, 1927). We would argue
that there is a great deal of commonality between these various models,
perhaps more so then there are differences. That said, only a few studies
have measured multiple “healthy leadership” constructs simulta-
neously; however, those few studies find notable overlaps, suggesting
the possibility of redundancy (e.g., Eberz & Antoni, 2018, report cor-
relations between their TIMP measure and health-oriented leadership
behaviors measured by the Franke & Felfe, 2011 instrument as high as
rxy=0.56).
Models of “healthy leadership” likewise make two implicit as-

sumptions. Owing to their unstated nature, two related issues emerge
when considering these implicit assumptions. First, these two assump-
tions are rarely tested in primary research. Second, if these assumptions
did not hold up to empirical scrutiny, then the utility of these models
for explaining occupational health and wellbeing would be quite lim-
ited. The first assumption is that the various conceptualizations of
“healthy leadership” serve as stand-alone constructs. That is, “healthy
leadership” is assumed to operate independently and incrementally to
other forms of leadership, and particularly to the benefit of employee
health and wellbeing. For example, one argument for the development
of “healthy leadership” models, is that established and general models
of leadership behavior or leader-follower relations (e.g., transforma-
tional leadership, LMX) are too broad and do not tap specific health-
related actions of leaders (see Franke et al., 2011; Franke et al., 2014).
Although offered as justification, this proposition remains largely un-
tested in the literature, as models of “healthy leadership” are rarely
compared to established leadership theories, and when such tests are
offered, they are rarely conducted with sufficient rigor to rule out other
plausible explanations. In contrast, researchers have argued that new
leadership models need to demonstrate incremental validity in pre-
dicting outcomes, above and beyond established leadership constructs
(Antonakis, 2017). To this end, Eberz and Antoni (2018) report zero-
order correlations between their TIMP inventory and individualized
consideration as high as rxy=0.75.
The second assumption of these models is that “healthy leadership”

is separable from the outcomes that it purports to influence. In other
words, “healthy leadership” behaviors are assumed to be distinct and
un-confounded with their intended consequences (i.e., follower health
and wellbeing; see Van Knippenberg & Sitkin, 2013). Raising questions
regarding this assumption is perhaps an artifact of the fact that early
models of “healthy leadership” were inductively developed (e.g.,
Eriksson, 2011; Vincent, 2012a, 2012b). However, the idea that there is
a reciprocity between leader and follower health is likewise sympto-
matic of this confounding. For example, the “self care” and “staff care”
distinction made by Franke and Felfe's (2011) model of health-oriented
leadership conflates leaders' health behaviors (i.e., leader-report “self
care,” e.g., “I actively care for my health”) with followers' perceptions
of their leader's health behaviors directed toward them (i.e., follower-
reported staff care, e.g., “My supervisors actively cares for my health”),
and with followers' self-reports of their health behaviors (i.e., follower-
reported “self care,” e.g., “I notice immediately if something is wrong
with my health”).
Further examples of such confounding can be seen in the SSIM

model by Eberz and Antoni (2016) and in the conceptualization of
health- and development-promoting leadership behavior by Vincent
(2012b). The SSIM depicts a complex, cyclical process, wherein leader

and follower health are dynamically intertwined with health-related
cognitions, goals, and emotions of both leaders and followers, with
consequent effects on leader and follower sense of coherence. Although
the SSIM model conflates leader and follower outcomes in its con-
ceptualization, the operationalization of “healthy leadership” via the
TIMP measure focuses on general leader behaviors surrounding trust,
error management, and work pressure, without reference to health. The
“health” component of this model is conceived as leader and follower
sense of coherence. Thus, the consequence of “healthy leadership” is
understood by the influence that these general leadership behaviors
have on sense of coherence. Similarly, the Vincent (2012b) scale of
health- and development-promoting leadership behavior measures 20
general leader behaviors that are not health-specific per se (e.g., clarity,
feedback). Evidence for “healthy leadership” is informed by the re-
lationship of these variables with follower-reported health outcomes
(i.e., irritation, emotional exhaustion, psychosomatic complaints). As
with the SSIM, the consequence of “healthy leadership” is taken as
evidence for its existence.
In a broader sense, there is a mismatch between the way these

constructs are defined and their specific operationalizations.
Fundamentally, this is a content validity issue that has clear bearing on
the construct validity of operationalizations of “healthy leadership,”
and the models that construe them. Also contributing to these concerns
about confounding, a majority of studies that purport to study “healthy
leadership” in one form or another rely on single time point, single-
source (i.e., follower report) methodologies (for two exceptions, see
Kranabetter & Niessen, 2017; Köppe, Kammerhoff, & Schütz, 2018). As
we will see from our review, prototypically, such studies survey fol-
lowers about their perceptions of their leader's capacity for “healthy
leadership” concurrently with self-reported health and wellbeing. This
raises concerns about common source/common method bias, a statis-
tical artifact which can unduly inflate such relationships (Williams &
McGonagle, 2016).

Review of empirical studies on “healthy leadership”

Our literature review focuses on empirical, quantitative and quali-
tative studies of “healthy leadership” and health-related outcomes for
employees (e.g., physical and mental health symptoms, subjective and
psychological wellbeing). We undertook a systematic approach to lit-
erature searching (e.g., Rudolph, Rauvola, & Zacher, 2018). We next
describe the methods and results of this review effort; Fig. 1 sum-
marizes the process undertaken here.

Method

We set a number of a priori inclusion/exclusion criteria. The pri-
mary inclusion criterion for quantitative studies is that the studies must
have considered both an explicit operationalization of at least one
“healthy leadership” construct (or a clear grounding in one such con-
struct, in the case of qualitative studies) and at least one relevant so-
matic (e.g., diagnosed illness, chronic health condition), subjective
health (e.g., self-reported physical/mental health, burnout), and/or
psychological health/wellbeing (e.g., life satisfaction) outcome.
Applying this criterion means that studies that only considered re-
lationships between established and more general leadership constructs
(e.g., LMX, aspects of transformational or transactional leadership;
Winkler, Busch, Clasen, & Vowinkel, 2014, 2015) and such health and
wellbeing outcomes were excluded, unless the joint influence of
“healthy leadership” was assessed concurrently with these constructs,
such that comparisons in predictive validity could be made directly
(e.g., comparing the relative predictive validity of aspects of transfor-
mational leadership versus “healthy leadership”; e.g., Franke et al.,
2014). To be comprehensive, we also considered qualitative studies of
“healthy leadership” (e.g., Kranabetter & Niessen, 2016) that clearly
delineate the influence of “healthy leadership” on follower health

C.W. Rudolph, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101335

9



outcomes, as well as studies that focus on “healthy leadership” (e.g.,
either in terms of leader or follower reports) and its associations with
health and wellbeing outcomes for leaders themselves (e.g., Jiménez,
Winkler, & Dunkl, 2017).
To obtain studies that met these criteria, we conducted compre-

hensive literature searches using several strategies. First, we searched
PsycInfo, Web of Science, Google Scholar, and PubMed, using a series of
iterative and structured keyword searches corresponding to the con-
structs discussed above (e.g., “health promoting leadership,” “health
oriented leadership,” “health promoting managerial work,” “health
specific leadership,” “health and development promoting leadership,”
“salutogenic leadership,” “healthy leadership,” “management support
for worksite health promotion,” “organizational leadership for health
promotion”).
Beyond keyword searches via search engines and databases, we

conducted forward and backward searches of highly-cited sources al-
ready identified by our primary literature review. We also skimmed the
reference sections of relevant review papers (e.g., Akerjordet et al.,
2018) and forward searched early theory development papers (e.g.,
Hanson, 2004). We took additional steps to obtain unpublished studies
for consideration in our review, including searching for and considering
relevant theses/dissertations and conference papers. Of note, when
both published and unpublished versions of a study were identified, we
retained only the version which reported more information (e.g., the
dissertation by Horstmann, 2018, reports an expanded version of that
reported in the published version by Horstmann & Remdisch, 2016).
This process resulted in k=489 sources for potential inclusion in

our literature review; for each search, we exported all records and
saved them to a database. After removing duplicate references, our
database included k=184 non-redundant sources. The first and second
authors then met and screened titles and abstracts of these sources for
obvious exclusions (e.g., those that were clearly not focused on “healthy
leadership”); this process resulted in the exclusion of k=30 studies
from our database. The remaining k=154 studies were then subjected
to a more in-depth full-text screening for inclusion in our review. To
accomplish this, the first and second author met again and collabora-
tively screened full-texts for each of these sources, applying the afore-
mentioned inclusion/exclusion criteria. Ultimately, these combined
efforts resulted in k= 35 studies that were retained for our review.
Fig. 1 presents a flowchart of this literature search process and Table 2
summarizes the studies included in our review.

Results

In this section, we present the results of our review of the k= 35
studies that we identified through our systematic search of the “healthy
leadership” literature (see Table 2). We organize our review around the
various “healthy leadership” constructs under investigation in these
studies. Moreover, within each construct grouping, we present studies
in chronological order (i.e., by year), unless otherwise noted. As we
have already stated, a great deal of ambiguity emerges when con-
sidering the labeling of “healthy leadership” constructs in this litera-
ture. For example, we often observed that studies claim to investigate
one particular form of “healthy leadership,” but measure a different

Fig. 1. Flowchart of literature search process.

C.W. Rudolph, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101335

10



form. In organizing our review, we have characterized these constructs
in line with the authors' original intentions and point out any confusion
that may arise from such decisions. Also, our review found several
studies that considered multiple measures of different “healthy lea-
dership” constructs (e.g., Jiménez, Winkler, & Dunkl, 2017). To account
for such studies, we focus our review on the primary construct of in-
terest within each study. When a secondary “healthy leadership” con-
struct was also measured (e.g., as a covariate, or to demonstrate evi-
dence for incremental or convergent validity), we only review the study
once, and within the section that corresponds to the primary “healthy
leadership” construct of interest.

Health-promoting leadership
By far, the most frequently studied “healthy leadership” construct

identified in our literature review was health-promoting leadership. We
identified 11 studies adopting a quantitative approach to studying
health-promoting leadership, and five studies adopting a qualitative
approach.

Quantitative studies of health-promoting leadership. In a conference paper,
Gurt and Elke (2009) used a two-wave complete panel survey design to
study the relationship between employee-reported health-promoting
leadership and strain across a six-month interval. Considering zero-
order relationships, health-promoting leadership was negatively, albeit
weakly, related to strain at both Time 1 (rxy=−0.19) and Time 2
(rxy=−0.14). Moreover, a structural equation model was specified to
test the concurrent and time-lagged indirect effect of health-promoting
leadership on follower strain through a measure of subjective health
culture. Only the results of a fully mediated model are reported, and
estimates of indirect effects and associated inferential tests are not
offered. Thus, it is difficult to understand the nature of the indirect
relationship modeled here.
In an unpublished thesis, Törnblom (2012) investigated relation-

ships between employee-reported health-promoting leadership and
health status using a cross-sectional design. The zero-order relationship
between health-promoting leadership and self-reported health status
suggests a small, positive relationship (rxy=0.13). However, when
construed together with transformational leadership in a multiple re-
gression model, the partial regression coefficient representing this re-
lationship is negative (β=−0.43). This can be explained by the ob-
servation that transformational leadership and health-promoting
leadership were correlated with each other at rxy=0.94, making these
largely redundant (i.e., collinear) predictors.
In an unpublished work, Andersson and Dafteke (2014) report the

results of a cross-sectional survey study. A significant zero-order re-
lationship between employee-reported health-promoting leadership
and an index composed of job satisfaction, development opportunities,
health, wellbeing, and emotional requirements was reported
(rxy=0.67).
Winkler et al. (2014) conducted a cross-sectional study with surveys

collected from followers and their leaders. Given the nested structure of
the data, four separate mixed effects models were considered for each
health outcome. Main effect relationships between the four employee-
reported health-promoting leadership measures and follower health
outcomes were inconsistent, with several relationships evaluated at the
p < .10 level of statistical significance.
In a cross-sectional survey study, Adler et al. (2017) investigated

work-related factors, including both “general” and health-promoting
leadership, that are associated with burnout among U.S. military
medical personnel. Considering zero-order relationships, follower-re-
ported health-promoting leadership was negatively associated with
burnout, PTSD symptoms, and perceived stressors. Dimensions of
burnout were considered further in two hierarchical multiple regression
models, wherein health-promoting leadership was found to explain
incremental variance of ΔR2= 1.5% and 2.3% in emotional exhaustion
and depersonalization, respectively, above and beyond covariates,

general leadership, PTSD symptoms, and stressors.
Additionally, we identified six studies of health-promoting leader-

ship by Jiménez and colleagues. Given similarities across these studies,
we review them as a set. First, in an unpublished conference paper,
Jiménez and Dunkl (2015) report two studies linking their measure of
health-promoting leadership conditions to follower health outcomes.
Both studies adopt cross-sectional survey designs. Considering zero-
order correlations, the first study suggests that health-promoting lea-
dership is positively associated with stress-related recovery; the results
of the second study suggest a similar positive relationship with work
engagement.
Dunkl, Jiménez, Žižek, Milfelner, and Kallus (2015) investigated

relationships among health-promoting leadership, transformational
leadership, and followers' recovery and perceived stress. The results of a
structural equation model indicate that health-promoting leadership
and transformational leadership are moderately correlated with one-
another (rxy=0.45). Moreover, both health-promoting leadership and
transformational leadership had independent, positive relationships
with recovery, but not with perceived stress. Variance explained (R2)
estimates were not provided, so it is difficult to gauge the relative ex-
planatory capacity of health-promoting leadership versus transforma-
tional leadership from this study.
In an unpublished conference paper, Bregenzer, Jiménez, and Kallus

(2015) present the results of a two-wave incomplete panel study across
a six-month interval that investigated effects of health-promoting lea-
dership on follower burnout, perceived stress, and recovery. At Time 1,
employees rated their supervisors' health-promoting leadership condi-
tions. At Time 2, they reported their burnout, perceived stress, and
recovery. Separate multiple regression models were specified for each
health outcome. The models suggested that, of the seven dimensions
assessed by the health-promoting leadership conditions scale, only the
“control” dimension was consistently related to outcomes (i.e., nega-
tively associated with burnout and perceived stress, and positively as-
sociated with recovery). Inconsistent and, for the most part, non-sig-
nificant relationships were observed for the other dimensions.
Additionally, because an incomplete panel design was used, these data
are essentially cross-sectional in nature. Thus, it is unclear from this
study whether health-promoting leadership affects changes in follower
health over time.
Jiménez, Winkler, and Dunkl (2017) considered leaders' self-as-

sessment of their own health-promoting leadership conditions. Leaders
rated their own health-promoting leadership (i.e. workload, control,
reward, community, fairness, value-fit, and health awareness) and
health-oriented leadership using Franke et al.'s (2014) measure. Leaders
also self-reported their own levels of recovery, perceived stress, and
burnout. Of note, only zero-order correlations are reported, so it is
difficult to compare the relative operation of the two “healthy leader-
ship” scales against one another. However, these correlations suggest a
degree of overlapping variance between these two different scales (i.e.,
with correlations among dimensions as high as rxy=0.65). That said, a
general pattern across correlations suggests that health-promoting lea-
dership is associated positively with recovery and negatively with
perceived stress and burnout.
Similarly, but among followers, Jiménez, Winkler, and Bregenzer

(2017) investigated relationships between health-promoting leadership
conditions, health-oriented leadership, and health outcomes, including
perceived stress, recovery, and burnout. Only zero-order correlations
are reported for this study, so it is not possible to compare the relative
operation of the two “healthy leadership” scales. However, the corre-
lations presented suggest a degree of overlapping variance between
these two different scales (i.e., with correlations among these dimen-
sions as high as rxy=0.84). The general pattern again suggests that
health-promoting leadership is associated positively with recovery and
negatively with perceived stress and burnout.
Lastly, Jiménez, Bregenzer, Kallus, et al. (2017) examined the re-

lationship between health-promoting leadership and follower recovery,

C.W. Rudolph, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101335

11



perceived stress, and burnout in two samples of workers who were
surveyed as part of a cross-sectional research design. As before, the
pattern of zero-order relationships reported suggests that health-pro-
moting leadership is associated positively with recovery, and negatively
with perceived stress and burnout. Despite the limitations of the cross-
sectional design adopted here, complex structural equation models
were tested, specifying causal linkages between health-promoting lea-
dership, recovery, stress, and burnout. Such models were fit separately
in both samples. Direct relationships between health-promoting lea-
dership and recovery and stress were simultaneously specified in both
models. In each, health-promoting leadership was positively associated
with recovery, but not associated with stress. In contrast, direct re-
lationships between health-promoting leadership and burnout were not
explicitly modeled here.

Qualitative studies of health-promoting leadership. Eriksson, Axelsson, and
Axelsson (2010) report the evaluation results of a leadership
development program. The immediate goal of the intervention was to
support the development of health-promoting leadership, with a longer-
term goal to reduce sickness absence rates among followers. Follower
health outcomes were only indirectly inferred, on the basis of leaders'
responses to semi-structured interviews, which represented the
evaluation of the intervention's effectiveness. One of the products of
the intervention was that leaders were tasked with developing “action
plans” for initiating, structuring, and monitoring health promotion
efforts in their workgroups; some leaders' plans included provisions to
analyze sickness rates and work attendance together with their
followers.
Juhlin (2012) conducted semi-structured interviews with leaders in

a “major organization.” The interview asked these leaders to describe
various ways in which they had enacted health-promoting leadership,
generally organized around themes of accessibility, commitment, con-
text, and control in their role and specifically in relation to followers'
health. The influence of health-promoting leadership on follower health
was inferred from leaders' responses to such questions. For example,
leaders variously mentioned that they consciously rotate employees
across job duties, particularly those which are strenuous, as a means of
reducing workload and mitigating fatigue associated with repetitive
and/or strenuous tasks.
Winkler, Busch, and Duresso (2013) investigated health-promoting

leadership behavior through semi-structured interviews with em-
ployees and managers. The interviews asked questions surrounding
general leadership behaviors, resource- and development-promoting
aspects of leadership, the role of leaders in stress management, and the
role of leadership for influencing health. An interesting observation
from this study is that followers often did not see the connection be-
tween their leader's behavior and their own health, or did not ne-
cessarily desire for such a link to exist.
In an unpublished thesis, Pärlemyr (2017) describes the results of a

qualitative investigation of health-promoting leadership, conducted via
semi-structured interviews with private sector leaders. Responses to
these interviews were subjected to a manifest content analysis, from
which various themes emerged representing leaders' perceptions of the
importance of their behavior for their followers' health. The influence of
health-promoting leadership on follower health outcomes was inferred
from leaders' responses (e.g., leaders suggested that they recognize that
their behavior affects their followers' health and wellbeing).
Finally, Furunes, Kaltveit, and Akerjordet (2018) conducted a qua-

litative study with nurses to study the attributes of health-promoting
leaders that are associated with health outcomes for followers. The
influence of health-promoting leadership was inferred from responses
to semi-structured interviews. The results suggest that certain actions
on the part of leaders influence indicators of follower wellbeing. In
particular, nurses reported that behaviors of leaders that convey the
meaningfulness of their work were particularly health promoting.

Health-oriented leadership
Six studies were identified that conceptualized “healthy leadership”

in terms of health-oriented leadership. Five such studies adopt a
quantitative methodology, relying on the health-oriented leadership
scale developed by Franke and colleagues (e.g., Franke et al., 2014;
Franke & Felfe, 2011). The final study identified used a qualitative
methodology, grounded within the broader idea of health-oriented
leadership.
First, a book chapter by Franke and Felfe (2011) provides an

overview of the development of their health-oriented leadership scale.
In addition, they offer the results of a two-wave incomplete panel study
conducted across four months, with data collected from both leaders
and followers. From the description, it is not clear whether these lea-
ders and followers were matched with one-another, however, the
single-level analyses presented seem to suggest they are not. Along with
health-oriented leadership, a measure of followers' health-promoting
behaviors, and two follower health outcomes – irritation and somatic
complaints – were collected. Ambiguities regarding levels of analysis
notwithstanding, a time lagged mediation model is presented and evi-
dence is provided to suggest that followers' health-promoting behavior
mediates the relationship between health-oriented leadership and
health outcomes.
Franke et al. (2014) present further evidence for the usefulness of

their measure of health-oriented leadership in two studies. The first
study is based upon a slightly larger sample of employees that pre-
dominantly overlaps with Franke and Felfe's (2011) construct valida-
tion effort, reported above; no follower health outcomes were reported
in this first study, however. The second study used an incomplete panel
survey design, with health-oriented leadership (i.e., “self care” and
“staff care” measures) collected at Time 1, and follower health out-
comes (i.e., health status, irritation, and health complaints) collected at
Time 2. At Time 1, a measure of transformational leadership was also
collected. In a series of hierarchical regression models, health-oriented
leadership dimensions accounted for incremental variance in follower
health outcomes above-and-beyond transformational leadership, ex-
plaining between ΔR2= 4% to 5% additional variance.
In one of the few multi-level/multi-source studies identified,

Kranabetter and Niessen (2017) surveyed leaders and their followers
from two different organizations using a cross-sectional research de-
sign. Cross-level correlations suggest that leaders' health-oriented lea-
dership was not related to their followers' exhaustion or cynicism.
However, in a series of hierarchical mixed effects models, health-or-
iented leadership was found to moderate the relationship between
transformational leadership and both of these follower health out-
comes, such that “higher” health-oriented leadership augmented the
otherwise negative relationship between transformational leadership
and both exhaustion and cynicism. Regarding incremental effects,
health-oriented leadership was only found to be incrementally related
to exhaustion, and only in one company. Estimates of the variance
explained by these models are not provided, so it is difficult to ascertain
the magnitude of these relationships.
A study by Santa Maria, Wolter, Gusy, Kleiber, and Renneberg

(2018) examined health-oriented leadership in the context of police
work. Using a cross-sectional survey design, this study investigated
relationships between health-oriented leadership, work-related health
behaviors, and health outcomes, including physical complaints,
burnout, depression, and wellbeing. Zero-order results and a structural
equation model suggest that health-oriented leadership is positively
associated with work-related health behaviors and wellbeing, and ne-
gatively associated with physical complaints, burnout, and depression.
In another multi-wave/multi-source study, Köppe et al. (2018) in-

vestigated how health-oriented leadership behavior serves as a me-
chanism linking the crossover effects of leaders' exhaustion to followers'
somatic complaints. The study used an incomplete two-wave panel
design, and a sample of leaders paired with one or two of their fol-
lowers. Leaders reported their exhaustion at Time 1. Three months

C.W. Rudolph, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101335

12



later, at Time 2, followers rated their leaders' health-oriented leadership
behavior (i.e., “staff care)” and their own somatic health complaints. No
direct effect of leaders' exhaustion on employees' somatic complaints
was observed; however, there was a significant indirect effect, in that
leaders' exhaustion influenced somatic complaints through employees'
assessments of leaders' “staff care” behavior.
Finally, a qualitative study by Kranabetter and Niessen (2016) in-

vestigated leaders' behavioral responses to exhausted employees, and
perceptions of how these responses contribute to reductions in ex-
haustion in a sample of managers. Grounded in the concept of health-
oriented leadership, 27 leadership behaviors that represent how man-
agers engage with exhausted employees were identified through
structured interviews. Interviewees were also asked to report, in their
opinion, which of these behaviors contributed most toward reducing
exhaustion. Among these behaviors, task (re)design and emotional
support were reported as being most efficacious in this regard. With
respect to other models of leadership, Kranabetter and Niessen also
report that 21 of these behaviors could be mapped onto similar beha-
viors that define either transformational leadership or individualized
consideration and initiating structure.

Health- and development-promoting leadership
We identified four studies that conceptualized “healthy leadership”

as health- and development-promoting leadership. First, Vincent (2011)
present the results of scale development efforts surrounding the
“health- and development-friendly leadership analysis.” Unfortunately,
incomplete results are presented, however, a brief summary of multiple
regression analyses is provided, wherein follower health outcomes were
individually regressed onto the health- and development-friendly lea-
dership analysis and transformational leadership, simultaneously. From
this summary, health- and development-promoting leadership seem to
explain variance in these outcomes incremental to transformational
leadership, accounting for between ΔR2=5% to 12% additional var-
iance across the outcomes considered.
Vincent (2012a) adopted a similar approach to Vincent (2011), by

considering a cross-sectional sample collected from employees working
in a variety of sectors. Only zero-order relationships are reported; thus,
it is not possible to directly evaluate the relative contributions of dif-
ferent leadership measures collected for explaining variation in fol-
lower health. That said, there was an expected pattern of zero-order
relationships present in these data, such that health- and development-
promoting leadership was positively associated with work engagement,
and negatively associated with irritation and emotional exhaustion. It
should also be noted that a similar pattern of relationships was ob-
served for support-oriented leadership.
Adopting a similar design, measurement, and analysis strategy to

the preceding two studies, Vincent (2012b), collected a cross-sectional
sample of employees. Considering incremental effects, health- and de-
velopment-promoting leadership explained variance in irritation,
emotional exhaustion, and psychosomatic health complaints above and
beyond transformational leadership and support-oriented leadership,
explaining between ΔR2=1% to 12% additional variance.
Finally, a report by Rigotti et al. (2014) presents results of the

“rewarding and sustainable health-promoting leadership” project. First,
in a cross-sectional pilot study, only zero-order relationships are re-
ported, so it is not possible to ascertain the relative contributions of
health- and development-promoting leadership against these other
leadership constructs. That said, these relationships suggest that health-
and development-promoting leadership is associated with follower
health in the expected direction for all outcomes, with the exception of
somatic problems for which no association was observed. Second, the
“main study” reported by Rigotti et al. (2014) presents the results of
both a three-wave incomplete panel survey study of leaders and their
followers, and an intervention study. The intervention, in which a
subset of the total sample participated, was a leadership development
program designed to enhance rewarding and health-supporting

leadership behavior. The intervention took place during multiple ses-
sions over two years, and involved a combination of lectures, team-
based workshops, coaching, and diary writing. The results of this in-
tervention provided weak and mixed results for its capacity to enhance
health- and development-promoting leadership behaviors and follower
health, with several relationships gauged against a p < .10 standard.
Regarding results from the survey component of this study, only

responses from “control group” followers (i.e., those who did not par-
ticipate in the intervention) were considered. Regression models are
reported for a subset of the available health outcomes noted above,
considering Time 1 to Time 3 relationships, constituting a lag of 22-
months. Health- and development-promoting leadership accounted for
a significant amount of variance in work engagement, exhaustion, ir-
ritation, somatic stress, and depression. Incremental models were also
tested, for certain combinations of other leadership variables (i.e.,
transformational, authentic, and fair leadership, and abusive super-
vision). However, such predictors were only included in these models if
they exhibited statistically significant zero-order correlations with the
outcome. Accordingly, the most comprehensive (i.e., with respect to
ruling out alternative leadership mechanisms) conclusion to be drawn
here is that health- and development-promoting leadership accounts for
incremental variance in work engagement, exhaustion, and depressive
symptoms, above and beyond transformational and authentic leader-
ship. These incremental relationships are observed without controlling
for baseline (Time 1) levels of corresponding outcomes, so these
otherwise longitudinal relationships are understood to be essentially
cross-sectional in nature.

Additional “healthy leadership” models
Although most studies identified as part of our literature search

efforts could be classified as examining health-promoting, health-or-
iented, or health- and development-promoting leadership, we identified
a number of other, related conceptualizations of “healthy leadership.”

Health-specific leadership
Two studies we identified focus on health-specific leadership. First,

Gurt et al. (2010) surveyed a sample of employees, and report zero-
order correlations that suggest that both “general” and health-specific
leadership are positively related to job satisfaction, and negatively re-
lated to strain. Moreover, a complex partial mediation model was tested
using cross-sectional data. Complete parameter estimates are not re-
ported; thus, it is not possible to make direct comparisons between the
relative predictive capacities of “general” and health-specific leader-
ship. That said, the zero-order effects of “general” leadership appear to
be of a higher magnitude than those of health-specific leadership.
Second, Horstmann (2018) presents two studies as part of a dis-

sertation that investigated relationships between health-specific lea-
dership and follower health. In the first study, zero-order results suggest
that health-specific leadership is negatively associated with health
complaints. Additionally, even though a cross-sectional design was
employed, a complex multiple-mediator model was tested, wherein
health-specific leadership was associated with health complaints
through social resources and demands. Despite the limitations of in-
ferences from such a model, at the very least, these results suggest that
health-specific leadership has an incremental relationship with health
complaints, insomuch as it explains variance above and beyond social
resources and demands. However, ΔR2 estimates are not reported
herein, making it difficult to judge the strength of this incremental ef-
fect.
In the second study, another cross-sectional survey design was

employed. Zero-order relationships suggest that health-specific leader-
ship is positively associated with “self care,” and negatively with
burnout. Despite the cross-sectional design, a multilevel moderated-
mediation model was also tested, accounting for the nesting of re-
spondents within participating geriatric care facilities. This model
specifically tested whether personal initiative (i.e., a form of proactive

C.W. Rudolph, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101335

13



behavior) moderates the indirect effect of health-specific leadership on
burnout through “self care.” Moderation results suggest that higher
levels of personal initiative enhance the positive relationship between
health-specific leadership and “self care.” Moreover, from the para-
meters considered in this mediation model, we can infer that health-
specific leadership predicts (lower) burnout incremental to the influ-
ence of “self care.” However, because estimates of ΔR2 are not provided,
it is challenging to ascertain the strength of this effect.

Healthy leadership
Although we have used the phrase “healthy leadership” to generally

characterize this entire literature, we did identify one study that con-
ceptualized healthy leadership as a distinct construct using this label.
Specifically, an unpublished conference paper by Möltner, Benkhofer,
and Hülsbeck (2016) studied healthy leadership, and its health-related
correlates. In terms of leader health outcomes, this study reports that
leaders with higher levels of both health-promoting employee leader-
ship and self-management reported higher levels of “mindfulness” and
more positive health cultures in their organizations.

Leadership support for health promotion
We identified two studies that conceptualized “healthy leadership”

in terms of leadership support for health promotion. First, in a multi-
source study, Milner et al. (2013) investigated the relationship between
leadership support for health promotion and employee wellbeing out-
comes. Despite the cross-sectional nature of these data, a serially
mediated multilevel structural equation model was specified, with
leadership support for health promotion indirectly affecting follower
wellbeing through workplace health promotion programs and policies
at the company level (i.e., the presence or absence of discrete health
promotion programs and policies) and perceptions of company com-
mitment to workplace health promotion at the follower level. Although
this model did not specify the direct relationship between leadership
support for health promotion and employee wellbeing, the zero-order
cross-level correlations between these variables suggests that they are
not statistically significant.
Second, an unpublished dissertation by Hoert (2014) used a cross-

sectional survey across four different organizations. In terms of zero-
order relationships, leadership support for health promotion was cor-
related in the expected directions with each of these health outcomes
(e.g., it was associated with higher job satisfaction and lower job
stress). However, in a series of multiple regression models where each
health outcome was regressed onto leadership support for health pro-
motion and perceived organizational health climate simultaneously,
different patterns of relationships were observed. For example, per-
ceived organizational health climate, but not leadership support for
health promotion, was associated with higher job satisfaction, lower job
stress, and higher work engagement. Of note, the non-independence
that resulted from the nesting of employees within the four organiza-
tions that were surveyed was not addressed.

Individual/organizational leadership for health promotion
Our literature searches found one study that operationalized in-

dividual/organizational leadership for health promotion. Specifically,
Barrett, Plotnikoff, and Raine (2007) report on the results of a program
evaluation effort surrounding a large-scale, multi-year health promo-
tion program. Only statistically significant predictors of each outcome
are reported, however those that are reported indicate that certain fa-
cets of organizational leadership for health promotion are associated
with “better” follower health (e.g., reduced tobacco use and increased
physical activity).

Salutogenic leadership
We identified two studies of salutogenic leadership. Of note, these

studies adopt quite different conceptualizations of the idea of saluto-
genic leadership. First, Axewill (2013) describes salutogenic leadership

in line with the general concept of salutogenesis (Antonovsky, 2005;
Hanson, 2010). A sample of managers were purposefully recruited to
participate in structured interviews on the basis of having different
levels of “healthy attendance.” The degree of salutogenic leadership
engaged in by each manager was ascertained from their responses, and
compared to their healthy attendance rates; findings suggest that
managers generally balanced production-oriented versus salutogenic
leadership styles. However, the manager deemed to have the “most”
production-oriented (i.e., as opposed to salutogenic) leadership style
also had the lowest rate of healthy attendance.
Second, Eberz and Antoni (2018) report on the validation of the

trust, incident management, and pressure (TIMP) inventory in two
samples of working adults. The TIMP inventory was found to relate to
sense of coherence. Moreover, the predictive capacity of the TIMP in-
ventory for explaining sense of coherence was found to be incremental
to transformational leadership in the first sample and other “healthy
leadership” constructs (i.e., health-oriented leadership) in the second
sample. In both samples, adding salutogenic leadership explained an
additional ΔR2= 19% of the variance in sense of coherence.

Health-promoting managerial work

One study identified through our literature searches, Dellve and
Eriksson (2017), operationalized “healthy leadership” as health-pro-
moting managerial work. This study reports cumulative results from six
separate leadership training programs, and a mixed-methods analysis of
these program's. Following a thematic analysis of responses to inter-
views, results suggested that the training had a positive influence on
leaders, broadening their perspectives and affording tangible tools for
encouraging health promotion. Regarding leader health outcomes,
leaders also reported significant increases in the quality of their psy-
chosocial work environments and increases in job satisfaction following
their participation in the training program. These results came from a
larger project, more fully elaborated on in an earlier unpublished report
(i.e., Eriksson, Dellve, Strömgren, & Edström Bard, 2016). Of note, this
report provides more complete details of the influence of the training
program on follower health outcomes, taken from follow-up surveys
distributed to followers. Regarding such outcomes, job satisfaction and
vitality increased among those followers whose leaders were more en-
gaged in the training program. Likewise, the number of sickness ab-
sences increased in workplaces where leaders were more engaged in the
program.

Descriptive qualitative studies

Finally, of note, our review suggests that most qualitative studies of
“healthy leadership” adopt a phenomenological perspective, which is to
say that they presuppose the existence of, and seek to understand,
people's experiences with “healthy leadership” (e.g., Furunes et al.,
2018). The qualitative studies identified through our literature searches
largely represent descriptive efforts, and tend to be represented by very
small samples (i.e., ns range from 5 to 12 participants/interviewees),
including a number of unpublished, primarily Swedish, theses and
dissertations (e.g., Axnér, 2015; Gustavsson, 2014; Jansson, 2016).
These studies are descriptive of “healthy leadership” in general, and
primarily aim to describe what “healthy leadership” means to leaders
themselves, without regard to its influence on followers (i.e., either
because it is not assessed, or because it is assumed through purely an-
ecdotal accounts). Given that no ascertainable follower health out-
comes are obtained or reported in such studies, they were otherwise
disqualified from our main literature review.

Discussion

In this final section of the paper, we summarize the most important
points of criticism regarding the research we reviewed above.

C.W. Rudolph, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101335

14



Subsequently, we address the final goal of this paper by outlining an
integrative research agenda including recommendations for “healthy
leadership” theory development, empirical research, and practical ap-
plications.

Summary of criticisms of research on “healthy leadership”

Our review of the “healthy leadership” literature, suggests nu-
merous problems that limit the validity of conclusions that can be
drawn from this research. We discuss these critiques here and sum-
marize them in Table 4. First, the literature on “healthy leadership” is
prone to “jingle” and “jangle” fallacies, which entail the wrong as-
sumptions that two constructs are the same because they have the same
label (jingle fallacy), or that two very similar constructs are distinct
because they have different labels (jangle fallacy; Kelley, 1927). There
are jingle fallacies in that a number of constructs in this literature have
been labeled health-promoting leadership (or very similarly, such as
health- and development-promoting leadership), even though the con-
tent of the measures used to operationalize these constructs is far less
aligned than their similar names would suggest. At the same time, there
are jangle fallacies in that several “healthy leadership” constructs do
not include health- and even leadership-specific items but, for example,
items on fairness and control (Jiménez, Bregenzer, Kallus, et al., 2017).
Other scales, such as salutogenic leadership (Eberz & Antoni, 2018),
include items (e.g., building trust) that are very similar to those in-
cluded in established leadership measures (e.g., LMX quality). Thus, the
positive effects of many “healthy leadership” constructs on follower
health and wellbeing may be confounded by effects of beneficial job
design characteristics and leadership constructs such as LMX quality
and individualized consideration. The existence of similar “healthy
leadership” conceptualizations also represents a case of construct pro-
liferation (i.e., “the accumulation of ostensibly different but potentially
identical constructs representing organizational phenomena,” Shaffer
et al., 2016, p. 89), already a noted concern in the broader leadership

literature (Avolio, 2007; Derue, Nahrgang, Wellman, & Humphrey,
2011).
Second, the inductive development of many “healthy leadership”

measures leads to ambiguity in terms of what they actually capture. For
example, Möltner, Benkhofer, and Hülsbeck (2016) asked leaders what
“healthy leadership” means to them personally, and the leaders them-
selves identified attitudes, values, and behaviors that cut across several
different “healthy leadership” models. Related concerns include unclear
procedures for scoring measures (e.g., Vincent, 2012a) and the open
question of whether multidimensional measures should be included as
separate main effects or as overall aggregate scores in statistical ana-
lyses.
Third, much of the empirical research on “healthy leadership” suf-

fers from methodological problems that are not unique to this area, but
have been lamented in the broader literature on organizational beha-
vior (e.g., Aguinis & Vandenberg, 2014). Most studies use single time
point/cross-sectional and single-source designs (i.e., self-reports by only
leaders or followers), raising concerns about common method bias and
the confounding of leadership behaviors with their intended outcomes.
Additionally, most studies do not control for established leadership
constructs, thus leaving open the question of whether “healthy lea-
dership” constructs explain incremental variance in follower health and
wellbeing.

Fourth, the reporting of results of empirical studies on “healthy
leadership” often is cumbersome. For example, although several studies
assessed control variables, they did not report unique variance ex-
plained by “healthy leadership” constructs in follower outcomes.
Finally, we note that most conceptual and empirical works on “healthy
leadership” have not adopted a critical approach when introducing new
concepts or discussing research findings. Researchers in this area seem
to be rather convinced that “healthy leadership” is a distinct, more
specific, and important construct that has unique and beneficial effects.
Compared to the goal of demonstrating the relevance of “healthy lea-
dership,” critical tests of theory often seem to take a backseat in this

Table 4
Summary of critiques levied against the “healthy leadership” literature.

Criticism of “healthy leadership” research
& theory

Description of criticism & relevant examples from existing
literature

Means of addressing criticism in future research

Jingle fallacies The incorrect assumptions that two constructs are the same
because they have the same label

- Empirically differentiate “healthy leadership” constructs from
one another via content analyses and factor analysis models

Jangle fallacies & construct proliferation The incorrect assumptions that two very similar constructs are
distinct because they have different labels (e.g., “health-
promoting leadership” and “health- and development-promoting
leadership”).

- Empirically consolidate “healthy leadership” constructs from
one another via content analyses and factor analysis models

Unclear construct definitions and
operationalizations

Ambiguities in defining (e.g., Möltner, Benkhofer, & Hülsbeck,
2016) and operationalizing (e.g., Vincent, 2012a) healthy
leadership constructs

- Adopt more rigorous definitions of “healthy leadership” that
do not rely on inductive inferences
- Clearly define “rules” for operationalizing “healthy
leadership”

Confounding of “healthy leadership”
behavior and its intended outcomes

The behaviors that defined “healthy leadership” are conflated
with their intended influences on health and wellbeing outcomes
(e.g., the “self care” and “staff care” distinction made by Franke &
Felfe's, 2011 model of health-oriented leadership)

- Clearly differentiate those attitudes, values, and behaviors
that are classified as “healthy leadership”
- Separate the measurement of “healthy leadership” from its
intended outcomes by collecting multi-source data

Poor methodology Use of sub-optimal research designs, that do not allow for
unambiguous conclusions to be drawn (e.g., cross-sectional
designs; Winkler et al., 2014)

- Design observational studies that collect fully-crossed and
lagged, multi-wave, and multisource data
- Design intervention studies that implement RCT or RD designs

Incomplete reporting of statistical models Failing to report all necessary information to gauge the
appropriateness of statistical conclusions (e.g., Jiménez and
Dunkl (2015 do not report variance explained effect size metrics)

- Follow “best practices” for the reporting of statistical models
(e.g., APA JARS standards)

Imprecise predictions derived from
“healthy leadership” frameworks

Existing “healthy leadership” frameworks do not lend themselves
well to precise predictions

- Unify and integrated “healthy leadership” frameworks, and
make specific provisions for testable assumptions to be gleaned
therefrom

“Healthy leadership” measurement suffers
from “phantom validation”

An unsystematic approach to the development of measures of
“healthy leadership” is apparent in this literature (e.g., Jiménez &
Dunkl, 2015; “Health-Promoting Leadership Conditions”)

- Adopt rigorous “best practices” for the development and
construct validation of “healthy leadership” measures
- Conduct re-validation studies of existing “healthy leadership”
measures

Risks associated with viewing “healthy
leadership” as a panacea

Overemphasizing the importance of “healthy leadership” risks
neglecting structural impediments to health and wellbeing which
could be more directly acted upon (e.g., work and job design)

- Adopt a critical perspective on the relative utility of “healthy
leadership” against other systems, policies, and practices that
may more directly influence health and wellbeing

C.W. Rudolph, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101335

15



literature. Like other leadership constructs, the promise of “healthy
leadership” has an appealing “hook” that has drawn researchers in (Van
Knippenberg & Sitkin, 2013). There is an intuitive, appealing message
underlying this literature – leaders can do “things” which directly in-
fluence their followers' health and wellbeing. Despite this enthusiasm,
the state of this literature is too scattered and underdeveloped to
warrant all of the attention that this concept has received. That said, we
see a variety of opportunities to improve research in this area.

A “new agenda” for theory development, research, and practice

Based on the critiques outlined above, we offer a number of ac-
tionable recommendations for future theoretical, empirical, and prac-
tical work on “healthy leadership.”

Recommendations for theory (re)development
First and foremost, this area would benefit from enhanced theo-

rizing regarding the nature of “healthy leadership” and clearer gui-
dance regarding its (assumed) influences. In terms of theory (re)de-
velopment, it is therefore important that scholars stop introducing
additional, new and unique “healthy leadership” constructs and asso-
ciated labels and instead focus on better understanding, (re)developing,
and integrating those that already exist (see Table 1) into a broader and
unified “healthy leadership” theoretical framework. Such a framework
should clearly distinguish between leader attitudes, values, and beha-
viors related to health and wellbeing. Moreover, it would seem neces-
sary to include multiple measurable dimensions within each of these
categories (e.g., behavior related to sickness presenteeism, behavior
related to follower physical and mental health, attitudes about health
and wellbeing).
Efforts at (re)developing a more unified “healthy leadership” theory

must also take steps to ensure that the predictions that follow from it
are specific and testable. One general criticism against existing “healthy
leadership” frameworks is that they do not offer precise predictions
about the linkage between leaders' attitudes, values, and behaviors on
the one hand, and associated favorable health and wellbeing outcomes
on the other. Moreover, such theories generally do not make predic-
tions about the conditions that give rise to “healthy leadership.” As
suggested, the basic premise underlying the idea of “healthy leader-
ship” is that “doing more” of it has a concomitant (assumed to be)
positive influence on such outcomes. For example, considering the
consequence of follower wellbeing, the common prediction would be:
“If leaders enact ‘healthy leadership’, then the wellbeing of their em-
ployees will improve (or be higher, especially in comparison to those
who do not).” This prediction can be boiled down to a direct function,
in which follower wellbeing is understood as a function of healthy
leadership:

= ffollower wellbeing (healthy leadership) (1)

It is this type of precise definition that is currently lacking in the
theorizing concerning “healthy leadership.” Such functional predictions
could also be extended to include health and wellbeing outcomes for
leaders, as well as outcomes at different levels of analysis (e.g., unit-
level wellbeing, indexed subjectively or objectively).
To begin addressing the need for enhanced theory, we propose a

process model of “healthy leadership” to inform future work (see
Fig. 2). Given that many of the critiques levied here would need to be
resolved before tests of this model could be reasonably attempted, we
consider this to be a “speculative” model in the spirit of House's (1976)
theory of charismatic leadership. Thus, we classify this as a “2019
model of ‘healthy leadership,’” which we offer in the hope that “…at
some future date, this theory will have led to a better theory.” (House,
1976 p. 26). In brief, the “core” of our proposed model suggests that
“healthy leadership” components (i.e., attitudes, values, behaviors)
influence follower and leader wellbeing outcomes both directly and
indirectly (through follower health-related attitudes, values, and

behaviors). These effects are incremental to those of established lea-
dership constructs (e.g., LMX, consideration) and work characteristics
(e.g., job demands) that explain variance in follower and leader well-
being. Moreover, the effects of “healthy leadership” are likely moder-
ated by leader individual differences and contextual conditions (see
Fig. 2 for examples). Beyond the core processes of the model, we pro-
pose that relevant leader individual differences and contextual condi-
tions have direct and interactive effects on “healthy leadership,” and
that follower and leader wellbeing directly and interactively influence
more distal, objective and subjective work outcomes.
Although the need for enhanced theorizing is pressing, in order to

embark on tests of this model, there is a broader landscape of “healthy
leadership” that must be mapped. We suggest that this mapping process
must unfold in a systematic and ordered process. Our suggestions here
are geared toward expanding the simple functional relationship de-
scribed above, as a means of expanding our understanding of “healthy
leadership.” Much of the effort required to integrate and unify “healthy
leadership” theory will be informed by a more rigorous research
agenda.

Recommendations for empirical research
Fig. 3 outlines a flowchart of the four steps involved in our proposed

research agenda and examples of research questions to ask at each step.
Our goal here is to provide prescriptive advice that, if followed, would
advance our empirical understanding, while additionally serving the
development of a more codified theory of “healthy leadership.” Where
relevant, we provide guidance for the types of research designs and
methodological concerns that are necessary to realize this research
agenda.

Step one. The first step in this new research agenda (Fig. 3, Step #1) is
to come to an understanding of how the multitude of “healthy
leadership” constructs are related and how they can be differentiated
from one-another (see Table 4). We need to establish a better
understanding of the construct domain of “healthy leadership;” we
need to define “what it is” and “what it is not.” The sheer number of
“healthy leadership” constructs that exist in this literature is a liability
to its broader contributions to our understanding of leadership- and
occupational health-related phenomena. Thus, the “jingle-jangle” of
“healthy leadership” has to be addressed explicitly, and this must be
done before attempts to differentiate it from other constructs are
considered. This can be done in a number of ways. For example, the
overlap of these constructs can be addressed through a thorough
content analysis of existing measures, which can be triangulated
through factor analytic methods and clustering/profile
methodologies. Particular attention must be paid to the construct
validation of various measures of “healthy leadership” found in the
literature (see Table 3). Indeed, a notable critique that could be levied
against the measurement of “healthy leadership,” is that it suffers from
what has been deemed “phantom validation” – the practice of re-using
unvalidated measures across multiple studies, and justifying this
practice via citing research that has used such unvalidated measures
in the past (Friedberg, 2019).
Once a clearer understanding of the “healthy leadership” construct

domain is established, the next step is to further establish its nomolo-
gical network through offering empirical evidence for convergent and
divergent validity. Beyond definitional concerns, evidence for con-
vergent and divergent validity speaks to the heart of the notion of
construct differentiation. To this end, it is especially important for re-
search to address and eliminate the confounding of actual “healthy
leadership” behaviors and their intended outcomes (see Van
Knippenberg & Sitkin, 2013). Specifically, “healthy leadership” could
be defined as leader behavior (influenced by attitudes and values) that
addresses follower health and wellbeing, but it should not be defined as
behavior that per se has positive effects on these outcomes. Overall, we
believe that there is a place for “healthy leadership” behavior in the

C.W. Rudolph, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101335

16



broader leadership theoretical space, but the coordinates of this space
need to be mapped and articulated more clearly.

Step two. The second step in this new research agenda (Fig. 3, Step #2)
would be to establish evidence for the incremental validity of “healthy
leadership.” This step will serve to additionally expand our

understanding of the construct space that defines “healthy leadership”
by establishing the unique role that it plays in the prediction of relevant
outcomes (e.g., follower health and wellbeing) above-and-beyond
established leadership constructs. For example, it is essential that
scholars establish whether “healthy leadership” should be construed
as distinct from or integrated with established leadership constructs.

Fig. 2. Proposed model of “healthy leadership”.
Note. Dotted lines indicate moderation. Arrows converging with circles indicate possible direct and interactive effects.

Fig. 3. Outline of steps in “new agenda” for research on “healthy leadership”.

C.W. Rudolph, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101335

17



Indeed, “healthy leadership” could also be conceived as a specific
behavioral outcome of high LMX quality (e.g., leaders taking
responsibility for followers' health and wellbeing, but also followers
becoming more aware of the health and wellbeing of their leaders).
“Healthy leadership” could also be understood as a specific
manifestation of the broader leadership style of individualized
consideration, which involves leaders showing an awareness of and
concern for their followers' health and wellbeing.
Beyond the incremental contributions of “healthy leadership,” its

unique role in predicting health and wellbeing above and beyond other
individual and organizational factors that promote these outcomes
needs to be established. Indeed, research as yet to widely consider
“healthy leadership” effects incremental to established predictors of
health and wellbeing at the individual level (e.g., proactivity, job
crafting) or at the team and organizational levels (e.g., job character-
istics, personnel practices).
Regardless if tested against existing leadership constructs, or other

individual or team and organizational factors, it is imperative that fu-
ture studies of “healthy leadership” report its incremental predictive
validity in terms of variance explained above and beyond these broader
and better-established constructs. These models should ideally be ex-
amined using fully-crossed and lagged longitudinal research designs
that permit modeling temporal dynamics and allow for more appro-
priate inferences about causality and mediation (Antonakis, 2017).
Additionally, to avoid pitfalls of common method bias, ratings of
“healthy leadership” and health and wellbeing outcomes should come
from different sources. Ideally, to avoid rating biases, “healthy leader-
ship” behavior should be observed during leader-follower interactions
and coded using theory-based, a priori established behavioral cate-
gories (see Lehmann-Willenbrock, Meinecke, Rowold, & Kauffeld,
2015).

Step three. The third step in this new research agenda (Fig. 3, Step #3)
should be to explore causal and boundary mechanisms of the influences
of “healthy leadership.” Research to establish direct and unconditional
relationships between “healthy leadership” and health and wellbeing
outcomes is useful for addressing the clarification of its construct space
and nomological network. However, beyond such relationships,
research needs to establish why and when “healthy leadership” effects
manifest to influence health and wellbeing.
“Why” questions concern mediating mechanisms, and because such

mechanisms imply a causal process, they are not easy to study. Indeed,
cross-sectional and single time point designs, such as those that are
typically used in “healthy leadership” research, are unsuitable to study
causal mechanisms (Antonakis, Bendahan, Jacquart, & Lalive, 2010).
Moreover, as with many dynamic phenomena, there is the possibility
for reciprocal mechanisms linking organization-, leader-, and follower-
level processes and outcomes via reinforcing loops between leaders and
followers, and the dynamic interplay within their work environments.
For example, in a top-down, cascading process, a “healthy organiza-
tional climate” may foster “healthy leadership” which, in turn, affects
follower health and wellbeing. From the bottom-up, follower health
and wellbeing may reinforce “healthy leadership” which, in the ag-
gregate, could be construed as one index of a “healthy organizational
climate.” This implied dynamic and non-recursive process may ap-
proximate a “wellbeing spiral,” making the specification of mediating
mechanisms challenging and begging for research designs that can
capture this implied dynamicity. Moreover, multilevel designs that
capture responses from top management, HR officers, supervisors, and
subordinates would allow for the emergence of these processes to be
studied.
“When” questions concern moderating mechanisms, and ask “For

whom…?” type research questions regarding the relative efficacy of
“healthy leadership.” Because “when” questions concern conditional
mechanisms, they are likewise difficult to study. However, given the
assumed top-down influences of “healthy leadership” on follower

health and wellbeing, it is feasible that there are a number of situational
contingencies for its relative effectiveness. For example, although the
vast majority of studies have focused on outcomes of “healthy leader-
ship,” future research could examine potential dispositional and con-
textual factors as antecedents and/or moderators of “healthy leader-
ship.” The findings of such research could have bearing for the
development of “healthy leadership” across individuals' careers.
Regarding methodologies, we additionally suggest that scholars

move away from inductive and qualitative, and especially phenomen-
ological approaches that generate various descriptions of “healthy
leadership” to deductive and quantitative designs that rigorously ex-
amine antecedents and consequences, as well as mediator and mod-
erators of “healthy leadership.” As suggested above, such efforts must
also take into account effects of established leadership constructs,
particularly, LMX quality and individualized consideration.

Step 4. The fourth step in this new research agenda (Fig. 3, Step #4) is
to develop interventions to enhance “healthy leadership.” Example
research questions to be addressed here include, “By what means can
‘healthy leadership’ be developed?” and “Does ‘healthy leadership’
development have a positive influence on leader and follower health
and wellbeing?” In understanding the efficacy of such efforts,
intervention studies should use randomized control trials to further
bolster inferences about causality (see Podsakoff & Podsakoff, 2019).
Absent the possibility of “true” randomization, researchers should
consider adopting quasi-experimental methods, including regression
discontinuity designs, as a means of estimating treatment effects for
“healthy leadership” interventions (Antonakis et al., 2010).
These four “steps” provide a path forward for research on “healthy

leadership” that will enhance the quality and impact of this body of
work. Our hope is that research on “healthy leadership” will adopt a
more critical focus guided by the principle of parsimony, as opposed to
a more lenient, confirmatory approach in the design of studies, ana-
lyses, reporting, and discussion. By adopting a sound empirical strategy,
including a more rigorous focus on measurement and theoretical (re)
development, the impact of this research will be greater.

Recommendations for practice
Regarding applications of “healthy leadership,” our general advice

to organizational practitioners is that they should likewise adopt a
critical attitude toward existing research on “healthy leadership,”
taking into account the limitations of this research with respect to
theory, methods and, sometimes, unclear, selective, and uncritical re-
porting of findings. The heterogeneous literature on “healthy leader-
ship” is currently too inconclusive and plagued with conceptual and
methodological problems to allow for more definite recommendations
for leadership practice. Importantly, we are not suggesting that leaders
and organizations should ignore employees' health and wellbeing—on
the contrary. We only suspect that research in this area might run the
risk of “reinventing the wheel,” because follower health and wellbeing
might already be, to some extent, addressed and influenced by estab-
lished and more general forms of leadership behavior.
We do see promise in the possibility for the assumed outcomes of

“healthy leadership” to be a mechanism by which leadership effec-
tiveness is gauged. For example, one metric of a leader's value to the
organization (i.e., their “return on investment”) could be the health and
wellbeing of their followers. The appeal of this idea, is that it would
serve as a direct mandate for the duty of care principle, putting a higher
degree of responsibility for ensuring follower health and wellbeing on
leaders themselves. This is noteworthy in an era where the burden of
maintaining one's wellbeing has shifted increasingly to the individual,
rather than the institution.
Moreover, the impact of “healthy leadership” could to be gauged

against tangible behavioral (e.g., sickness absences) and economic
metrics (e.g., healthcare costs). These ideas beg further the question of
whether we should (re)structure reward systems for leaders to promote

C.W. Rudolph, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101335

18



the application of “healthy leadership” behaviors. Perhaps leaders
should be held accountable for their followers' health and wellbeing,
much like they would for their individual “bottom line,” economic
contributions. Such questions raise an important, as-of-yet unlevied
critique of “healthy leadership” in general. Specifically, we have not
directly addressed whether the fundamental premise of “healthy lea-
dership” is itself a good thing for followers, leaders, their organizations,
and society as a whole. Like many phenomena, an overemphasis on the
role of “healthy leadership” is accompanied by certain hazards asso-
ciated with its popularity. Putting the onus for follower health and
wellbeing on leaders' shoulders risks the possibility for an “All we need
is leadership…” mentality to emerge. The risk here specifically being
that, like any supposed panacea, this mentality holds up “healthy lea-
dership” as a “cure-all” remedy, but does nothing to change the systems
that make work a detriment to employee health and wellbeing in the
first place (e.g., poor-quality job characteristics).

Conclusion

Our review of research on “healthy leadership” literature con-
tributes to leadership literature in at least three important ways. First,
our conceptual overview and our systematic and critical review brings
needed clarity to this burgeoning research topic. Second, we argue that
the multiplicity in “healthy leadership” models and constructs is a lia-
bility rather than a strength of this literature. To be clear, we would not
argue against the need to consider specific health-related leader atti-
tudes, values, and behaviors, necessarily. Rather, very similar con-
structs have been offered and adopted uncritically and without regard
for the broader nomological network of leadership. We hope that our
review and critique serves as a call for more careful theoretical and
empirical elaborations about this general idea. Finally, we have criti-
cally evaluated existing research regarding the confounding of actual
leadership behaviors and their intended outcomes, and we have as-
sessed whether research has sufficiently addressed the issue of the in-
cremental validity of “healthy leadership.” Based on these critical
evaluations, we have outlined a set of prescriptive recommendations for
theory development efforts, future research, and practical applications
regarding “healthy leadership.” We hope that our review will help
scholars and practitioners critically assess the contributions of “healthy
leadership” constructs, models, and assessments to the leadership lit-
erature and organizational settings, respectively.

References1

*Adler, A. B., Adrian, A. L., Hemphill, M., Scaro, N. H., Sipos, M. L., & Thomas, J. L.
(2017). Professional stress and burnout in US military medical personnel deployed to
Afghanistan. Military Medicine, 182(3–4), 1669–1676. https://doi.org/10.7205/
MILMED-D-16-00154.

Aguinis, H., & Vandenberg, R. J. (2014). An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure:
Improving research quality before data collection. Annual Review of Organizational
Psychology and Organizational Behavior, 1(1), 569–595. https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev-orgpsych-031413-091231.

Akerjordet, K., Furunes, T., & Haver, A. (2018). Health-promoting leadership: An in-
tegrative review and future research agenda. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 74,
1505–1516. https://doi.org/10.1111/jan.13567.

Anderson, D., Plotnikoff, R. C., Raine, K., & Barrett, L. (2005). Development of measures
of individual leadership for health promotion. Leadership in Health Services, 18, 1–12.
https://doi.org/10.1108/13660750510594846.

*Andersson, M., & Dafteke, S. (2014). The health-promoting leadership's relationship with
employees' well-being in the health care sector. Unpublished thesisHalmstad, Sweden:
University of Halmstad.

Antonakis, J. (2017). On doing better science: From thrill of discovery to policy im-
plications. The Leadership Quarterly, 28(1), 5–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.
2017.01.006.

Antonakis, J., Bendahan, S., Jacquart, P., & Lalive, R. (2010). On making causal claims: A
review and recommendations. The Leadership Quarterly, 21, 1086–1120. doi:10.
1016=j.leaqua.2010.10.010

Antonovsky, A. (1987). Unraveling the mystery of health. London: Jossey-Bass.
Antonovsky, A. (2005). Hälsans mysterium. Stockholm: Bokförlaget Natur och Kultur.
Avolio, B. J. (2007). Promoting more integrative strategies for leadership theory-building.

American Psychologist, 62, 25–33. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.62.1.25.
*Axewill, F. (2013). Leadership and attendance: A qualitative interview study. Unpublished

thesisÖrebro, Sweden: Örebro University.
Axnér, L. R. (2015). Hälsofrämjande ledarskap inom förskola och skola: Chefers erfarenheter

av förutsättningar och handlingsutrymme. [Health-promoting leadership in preschool and
school: The managers' experiences of conditions and scope for action]. Unpublished
thesisVästerås, Sweden: Mälardalen University.

Barrett, L., Plotnikoff, R. C., Raine, K., & Anderson, D. (2005). Development of measures
of organizational leadership for health promotion. Health Education & Behavior, 32(2),
195–207. https://doi.org/10.1177/1090198104271970.

*Barrett, L. L., Plotnikoff, R. C., & Raine, K. (2007). Organizational leadership and its
relationship to regional health authority actions to promote health. Journal of Health
Organization and Management, 21(3), 259–282. https://doi.org/10.1108/
14777260710751735.

Berntson, E., & Marklund, S. (2007). The relationship between perceived employability
and subsequent health. Work & Stress, 21(3), 279–292. https://doi.org/10.1080/
02678370701659215.

Böhm, S., Baumgärtner, M. K., & Kreissner, L. M. (2016). The relationship between lea-
dership and health: A comparison of general and health-focused leadership ap-
proaches. In M. Wiencke, M. Cacace, & S. Fischer (Eds.). Healthy at work –
Interdisciplinary perspectives (pp. 87–102). Berlin, Germany: Springer. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-32331-2.

Böhm, S. A., & Baumgärtner, M. K. (2016). Gesünder führen. Harvard Business Manager,
38(2), 6–9.

*Bregenzer, A., Jiménez, P., & Kallus, W. (2015, May). Health-promoting leadership
culture and its effects on employee health. Paper presented at the 17th European
Congress of Work and Organizational Psychology of the European Association of Work and
Organizational Psychology (EAWOP), Oslo, Norway.

Della, L. J., DeJoy, D. M., Goetzel, R. Z., Ozminkowski, R. J., & Wilson, M. G. (2008).
Assessing management support for worksite health promotion: Psychometric analysis
of the leading by example (LBE) instrument. American Journal of Health Promotion,
22(5), 359–367. https://doi.org/10.4278/ajhp.22.5.359.

Della, L. J., DeJoy, D. M., Mitchell, S. G., Goetzel, R. Z., Roemer, E. C., & Wilson, M. G.
(2010). Management support of workplace health promotion: Field test of the leading
by example tool. American Journal of Health Promotion, 25(2), 138–146. https://doi.
org/10.4278/ajhp.080930-QUAN-225.

*Dellve, L., & Eriksson, A. (2017). Health-promoting managerial work: A theoretical
framework for a leadership program that supports knowledge and capability to craft
sustainable work practices in daily practice and during organizational change.
Societies, 7(2), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.3390/soc7020012.

Derue, D. S., Nahrgang, J. D., Wellman, N. E. D., & Humphrey, S. E. (2011). Trait and
behavioral theories of leadership: An integration and meta-analytic test of their re-
lative validity. Personnel Psychology, 64, 7–52. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.
2010.01201.x.

*Dunkl, A., Jiménez, P., Žižek, S.Š., Milfelner, B., & Kallus, W. K. (2015). Similarities and
differences of health-promoting leadership and transformational leadership. Naše
Gospodarstvo, 61(4), 3–13. https://doi.org/10.1515/ngoe-2015-0013.

Eberz, S., & Antoni, C. H. (2016). The Systemic Salutogenic Interaction Modell (SSIM) - A
holistic approach for explanation and development of health-promoting interactions
between leaders and employees. Gruppe. Interaktion. Organisation. Zeitschrift für
Angewandte Organisationspsychologie (GIO), 47(3), 265–273. https://doi.org/10.
1007/11612.1862-2615.

*Eberz, S., & Antoni, C. H. (2018). The TIMP-inventory – A contribution to the identifi-
cation of core-factors of salutogenic leadership. Zeitschrift für angewandte
Organisationspsychologie, 1, 69–80. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11612-017-0384-4.

Eriksson, A. (2011). Health-promoting leadership: A study of the concept and critical condi-
tions for implementation and evaluation (Unpublished doctoral dissertation)Göteborg,
Sweden: Nordic School of Public Health NHV.

Eriksson, A., Axelsson, R., & Axelsson, S. B. (2011). Health promoting
leadership–Different views of the concept. Work, 40(1), 75–84. https://doi.org/10.
3233/WOR-2011-1208.

*Eriksson, A., Axelsson, S. B., & Axelsson, R. (2010, February). Implementation and
evaluation of health-promoting leadership. Paper presented at Towards Better Work and
Well-being International Conference, Helsinki, Finland.

Eriksson, A., Dellve, L., Strömgren, M., & Edström Bard, E. (2016). Development of sus-
tainable and health-promoting leadership—In daily practice and during organizational
change [unpublished research report]. Stockholm, Sweden: TRITA-STH.

Faragher, E. B., Cass, M., & Cooper, C. L. (2013). The relationship between job satisfaction
and health: A meta-analysis. In C. L. Cooper (Vol. Ed.), From stress to wellbeing. volume
1. From stress to wellbeing (pp. 254–271). London: Palgrave Macmillan UK. https://
doi.org/10.1057/9781137310651_12.

Ford, M. T., Cerasoli, C. P., Higgins, J. A., & Decesare, A. L. (2011). Relationships between
psychological, physical, and behavioural health and work performance: A review and
meta-analysis. Work & Stress, 25(3), 185–204. https://doi.org/10.1080/02678373.
2011.609035.

Franke, F. (2012). Leadership and follower health: The effects of transformational and health-
oriented leadership on follower health outcomes (Doctoral dissertation)Hamburg,
Germany: Helmut-Schmidt-Universität.

Franke, F., Ducki, A., & Felfe, J. (2015). Gesundheitsförderliche führung. In J. Felfe (Ed.).
Trends der psychologischen Führungsforschung: Neue Konzepte, Methoden und
Erkenntnisse (pp. 253–254). Göttingen: Hogrefe.

*Franke, F., & Felfe, J. (2011). Diagnose gesundheitsförderlicher führung - Das instru-
ment “health-oriented leadership”. In B. Badura, A. Ducki, H. Schröder, J. Klose, & K.

1 Note: References with an asterisk (“*”) were included in our systematic
review.

C.W. Rudolph, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101335

19

https://doi.org/10.7205/MILMED-D-16-00154
https://doi.org/10.7205/MILMED-D-16-00154
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-orgpsych-031413-091231
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-orgpsych-031413-091231
https://doi.org/10.1111/jan.13567
https://doi.org/10.1108/13660750510594846
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0025
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2017.01.006
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2017.01.006
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0040
https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.62.1.25
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0055
https://doi.org/10.1177/1090198104271970
https://doi.org/10.1108/14777260710751735
https://doi.org/10.1108/14777260710751735
https://doi.org/10.1080/02678370701659215
https://doi.org/10.1080/02678370701659215
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-32331-2
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-32331-2
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0085
https://doi.org/10.4278/ajhp.22.5.359
https://doi.org/10.4278/ajhp.080930-QUAN-225
https://doi.org/10.4278/ajhp.080930-QUAN-225
https://doi.org/10.3390/soc7020012
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.2010.01201.x
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.2010.01201.x
https://doi.org/10.1515/ngoe-2015-0013
https://doi.org/10.1007/11612.1862-2615
https://doi.org/10.1007/11612.1862-2615
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11612-017-0384-4
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0125
https://doi.org/10.3233/WOR-2011-1208
https://doi.org/10.3233/WOR-2011-1208
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0140
https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137310651_12
https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137310651_12
https://doi.org/10.1080/02678373.2011.609035
https://doi.org/10.1080/02678373.2011.609035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0170


Macco (Eds.). Fehlzeiten-Report 2011 (pp. 3–13). Heidelberg: Springer.
*Franke, F., Felfe, J., & Pundt, A. (2014). The impact of health-oriented leadership on

follower health: Development and test of a new instrument measuring health-pro-
moting leadership. German Journal of Human Resource Management, 28(1–2),
139–161. https://doi.org/10.1177/239700221402800108.

Franke, F., Vincent, S., & Felfe, J. (2011). Gesundheitsbezogene Führung. In E. Bamberg,
A. Ducki, & A.-M. Metz (Eds.). Gesundheitsförderung und Gesundheitsmanagement in der
Arbeitswelt. Ein Handbuch (pp. 371–392). Göttingen: Hogrefe.

Friedberg, M. (2019, July 15). Phantom validation: The practice of reusing the same
unvalidated measure across multiple studies, citing the first study that used the (still
unvalidated) measure as precedent for using it. [Twitter Post]. Retrieved from
https://twitter.com/mwfriedberg/status/1150746932123451394.

*Furunes, T., Kaltveit, A., & Akerjordet, K. (2018). Health-promoting leadership: A qua-
litative study from experienced nurses' perspective. Journal of Clinical Nursing,
27(23–24), 4290–4301. https://doi.org/10.1111/jocn.14621.

*Gurt, J., & Elke, G. (2009). Health promoting leadership: The mediating role of an or-
ganizational health culture. In B. T. Karsh (Ed.). Proceedings of the international con-
ference on ergonomics and health aspects of work with computers (pp. 29–38). Berlin,
Germany: Springer.

*Gurt, J., Schwennen, C., & Elke, G. (2011). Health-specific leadership: Is there an as-
sociation between leader consideration for the health of employees and their strain
and well-being? Work & Stress, 25(2), 108–127. https://doi.org/10.1080/02678373.
2011.595947.

Gurt, J., Uhle, T., & Schwennen, C. (2010). Fragebogen zum Arbeits- und
Gesundheitsschutz- Betriebliche Gesundheitsförderung [The organizational health
and safety questionnaire - work site health promotion]. In W. Sarges, H. Wottawa, &
C. Roos (Eds.). Handbuch wirtschaftspsychologischer Testverfahren (pp. 45–54).
Lengerich, Germany: Pabst.

Gustavsson, T. (2014). Prerequisites for a health-promoting leadership: A qualitative study on
the conditions and obstacles in the health-promoting leadership among the first-line man-
agers in Västerås city. Unpublished thesisVästerås, Sweden: Mälardalen University.

Halbesleben, J. R. B. (2006). Sources of social support and burnout: A meta-analytic test
of the conservation of resources model. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91(5),
1134–1145. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.91.5.1134.

Hanson, A. (2004). Hälsopromotion i arbetslivet. Lund: Studentlitteratur.
Hanson, A. (2010). Salutogent ledarskap – för hälsosam framgång. Stockholm:

Fortbildning AB.
Harms, P. D., Credé, M., Tynan, M., Leon, M., & Jeung, W. (2017). Leadership and stress:

A meta-analytic review. The Leadership Quarterly, 28(1), 178–194. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.leaqua.2016.10.006.

*Hoert, J. W. (2014). Employee work and health behaviors: The role of leadership support for
health promotion and organizational health climate (Unpublished doctoral dissertation)
Louisville, Kentucky: University of Louisville.

*Horstmann, D. (2018). Enhancing employee self-care: The moderating effect of personal
initiative on health-specific leadership. European Journal of Health Psychology, 25,
96–106. https://doi.org/10.1027/2512-8442/a000014.

Horstmann, D., & Remdisch, S. (2016). Health-oriented leadership in the geriatric care
sector: The role of social job demands and resources for employees' health and
commitment. Zeitschrift für Arbeits- und Organisationspsychologie, 60(4), 199–211.
https://doi.org/10.1026/0932-4089/a000223.

House, R. J. (1976). A 1976 theory of charismatic leadership. Paper presented at the
Southern Illinois University Fourth Biennial Leadership Symposium (Carbondale, IL
October 26–28, 1976). Working paper series 76-06.

Jansson, S. (2016). Leaders' experiences of health promotion leadership and resources that
promote their health (Unpublished thesis)Västerås, Sweden: Mälardalen University.

*Jiménez, P., Bregenzer, A., Kallus, K. W., Fruhwirth, B., & Wagner-Hartl, V. (2017).
Enhancing resources at the workplace with health-promoting leadership. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 14(10), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.
3390/ijerph14101264.

*Jiménez, P., & Dunkl, A. (2015). The role of leadership for engagement at the workplace.
Paper presented at International Symposium, Ljublijana, Slovenia.

Jiménez, P., Dunkl, A., Hofer, C., & Vogrincic, C. (2013). Leadership styles in Austria and
Slovenia—A new concept of healthy leadership. Proceedings of the 2nd Chance4change
International Conference, Maribor, Slovenia.

Jiménez, P., & Winkler, B. (2011). Health relevant leadership dimensions. Unpublished
manuscriptGraz: University of Graz.

*Jiménez, P., Winkler, B., & Bregenzer, A. (2017). Developing sustainable workplaces
with leadership: Feedback about organizational working conditions to support lea-
ders in health-promoting behavior. Sustainability, 9(11), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.
3390/su9111944.

*Jiménez, P., Winkler, B., & Dunkl, A. (2017). Creating a healthy working environment
with leadership: The concept of health-promoting leadership. The International
Journal of Human Resource Management, 28(17), 2430–2448. https://doi.org/10.
1080/09585192.2015.1137609.

*Juhlin, J. (2012). Leaders 'view of their leadership in relation to the employees' health: A
qualitative organizational study (Unpublished thesis)Östersund, Sweden: Mid Sweden
University.

Kaluza, A. J., Boer, D., Buengeler, C., & van Dick, R. (2019). Leadership behaviour and
leader self-reported well-being: A review, integration and meta-analytic examination.
Work & Stress, 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1080/02678373.2019.1617369.

Kelley, T. L. (1927). Interpretation of educational measurements. Yonkers-on-Hudson, N.Y:
World Book Company.

*Köppe, C., Kammerhoff, J., & Schütz, A. (2018). Leader-follower crossover: Exhaustion
predicts somatic complaints via StaffCare behavior. Journal of Managerial Psychology,
33(3), 297–310. https://doi.org/10.1108/JMP-10-2017-0367.

Kramer, A., & Son, J. (2016). Who cares about the health of health care professionals? An

18-year longitudinal study of working time, health, and occupational turnover. ILR
Review, 69(4), 939–960. https://doi.org/10.1177/0019793916640492.

*Kranabetter, C., & Niessen, C. (2016). How managers respond to exhausted employees.
Journal of Personnel Psychology, 15(3), 106–115. https://doi.org/10.1027/1866-
5888/a000157.

*Kranabetter, C., & Niessen, C. (2017). Managers as role models for health: Moderators of
the relationship of transformational leadership with employee exhaustion and cyni-
cism. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 22(4), 492–502. https://doi.org/10.
1037/ocp0000044.

Kristensen, T. S., Hannerz, H., Hogh, A., & Borg, V. (2005). The Copenhagen Psychosocial
Questionnaire-A tool for the assessment and improvement of the psychosocial work
environment. Scandinavian Journal of Work Environment and Health, 31(6), 438–449.
https://doi.org/10.5271/sjweh.948.

Kuoppala, J., Lamminpää, A., Liira, J., & Vainio, H. (2008). Leadership, job well-being,
and health effects - A systematic review and a meta-analysis. Journal of Occupational
and Environmental Medicine, 50(8), 904–915. https://doi.org/10.1097/JOM.
0b013e31817e918d.

Lehmann-Willenbrock, N., Meinecke, A. L., Rowold, J., & Kauffeld, S. (2015). How
transformational leadership works during team interactions: A behavioral process
analysis. The Leadership Quarterly, 26(6), 1017–1033. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
leaqua.2015.07.003.

Maslach, C., & Leiter, M. P. (2008). Early predictors of job burnout and engagement.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 93, 498–512. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.93.
3.498.

*Milner, K., Greyling, M., Goetzel, R., Da Silva, R., Kolbe-Alexander, T., Patel, D., ...
Beckowski, M. (2013). The relationship between leadership support, workplace
health promotion and employee wellbeing in South Africa. Health Promotion
International, 30(3), 514–522. https://doi.org/10.1093/heapro/dat064.

*Möltner, H., Benkhofer, S., & Hülsbeck, M. (2016, April). Healthy leadership.
Accompanying study on mindful leadership. Paper presented at Witten: Center for
Continuing Education (ZFW), Witten, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany.

Montano, D., Reeske, A., Franke, F., & Hüffmeier, J. (2017). Leadership, followers' mental
health and job performance in organizations: A comprehensive meta-analysis from an
occupational health perspective. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 38(3), 327–350.
https://doi.org/10.1002/job.2124.

National Academy of Sciences (1999). The changing nature of work: Implications for occu-
pational analysis. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

*Pärlemyr, A. S. (2017). The importance of leadership for employees' health: A qualitative
study from a managerial perspective (Unpublished thesis)Västerås, Sweden: Mälardalen
University.

Podsakoff, P. M., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2019). Experimental designs in management and
leadership research: Strengths, limitations, and recommendations for improving
publishability. The Leadership Quarterly, 30(1), 11–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
leaqua.2018.11.002.

Richardson, K. M. (2017). Managing employee stress and wellness in the new millennium.
Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 22, 423–428. https://doi.org/10.1037/
ocp0000066.

*Rigotti, T., Holstad, T., Mohr, G., Stempel, C., Hansen, E., Loeb, C., ... Perko, K. (2014).
Rewarding and sustainable health promoting leadership. Dortmund, Germany:
Bundesanstalt für Arbeitsschutz und Arbeitsmedizin.

Rudolph, C. W., Rauvola, R. S., & Zacher, H. (2018). Leadership and generations at work:
A critical review. Leadership Quarterly, 29(1), 44–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
leaqua.2017.09.004.

*Santa Maria, A., Wolter, C., Gusy, B., Kleiber, D., & Renneberg, B. (2018). The impact of
health-oriented leadership on police officers' physical health, burnout, depression
and well-being. Policing: A Journal of Policy and Practice. https://doi.org/10.1093/
police/pay067.

Shaffer, J. A., DeGeest, D., & Li, A. (2016). Tackling the problem of construct prolifera-
tion: A guide to assessing the discriminant validity of conceptually related constructs.
Organizational Research Methods, 19(1), 80–110. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1094428115598239.

Spiess, E., & Stadler, P. (2016). Four-level model of health-promoting leadership. In M.
Wiencke, M. Cacace, & S. Fischer (Eds.). Healthy at work – Interdisciplinary perspectives
(pp. 103–113). Berlin, Germany: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
32331-2_8.

Tetrick, L. E., & Winslow, C. J. (2015). Workplace stress management interventions and
health promotion. Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational
Behavior, 2, 583–603. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-orgpsych-032414-111341.

*Törnblom, B. (2012). Improved communication can give better results on employee surveys
(Unpublished thesis)Västerås, Sweden: Mälardalen University.

Van Knippenberg, D., & Sitkin, S. B. (2013). A critical assessment of charismatic-trans-
formational leadership research: Back to the drawing board? The Academy of
Management Annals, 7(1), 1–60. https://doi.org/10.5465/19416520.2013.759433.

Vincent, S. (2010). Health-promoting leadership behaviour: A new measure. Paper presented at
the 4th International Seminar of Positive Occupational Health Psychology, Lisbon.

*Vincent, S. (2011). Health and development-promoting leadership: An analysis instru-
ment. In B. Badura, A. Ducki, H. Schröder, J. Klose, & K. Macco (Eds.). Fehlzeiten-
report 2011 (pp. 49–60). Heidelberg: Springer.

*Vincent, S. (2012a). Health and development-promoting leadership behavior: Gender-
specific differences. Gruppe. Interaktion. Organisation. Zeitschrift für Angewandte
Organisationspsychologie (GIO), 43(1), 61–89. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11612-011-
0170-7.

*Vincent, S. (2012b). Analyseinstrument für gesundheits- und entwicklungsförderliches
Führungsverhalten: eine Validierungsstudie [Analysis instrument for health- and
development-promoting leadership behavior: A validation study]. Zeitschrift für
Arbeitswissenschaft, 66, 38–57.

C.W. Rudolph, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101335

20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0170
https://doi.org/10.1177/239700221402800108
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0180
https://twitter.com/mwfriedberg/status/1150746932123451394
https://doi.org/10.1111/jocn.14621
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0195
https://doi.org/10.1080/02678373.2011.595947
https://doi.org/10.1080/02678373.2011.595947
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0210
https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.91.5.1134
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0225
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2016.10.006
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2016.10.006
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0235
https://doi.org/10.1027/2512-8442/a000014
https://doi.org/10.1026/0932-4089/a000223
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0255
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph14101264
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph14101264
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0275
https://doi.org/10.3390/su9111944
https://doi.org/10.3390/su9111944
https://doi.org/10.1080/09585192.2015.1137609
https://doi.org/10.1080/09585192.2015.1137609
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0290
https://doi.org/10.1080/02678373.2019.1617369
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0300
https://doi.org/10.1108/JMP-10-2017-0367
https://doi.org/10.1177/0019793916640492
https://doi.org/10.1027/1866-5888/a000157
https://doi.org/10.1027/1866-5888/a000157
https://doi.org/10.1037/ocp0000044
https://doi.org/10.1037/ocp0000044
https://doi.org/10.5271/sjweh.948
https://doi.org/10.1097/JOM.0b013e31817e918d
https://doi.org/10.1097/JOM.0b013e31817e918d
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2015.07.003
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2015.07.003
https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.93.3.498
https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.93.3.498
https://doi.org/10.1093/heapro/dat064
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0350
https://doi.org/10.1002/job.2124
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0365
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2018.11.002
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2018.11.002
https://doi.org/10.1037/ocp0000066
https://doi.org/10.1037/ocp0000066
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0380
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2017.09.004
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2017.09.004
https://doi.org/10.1093/police/pay067
https://doi.org/10.1093/police/pay067
https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428115598239
https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428115598239
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-32331-2_8
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-32331-2_8
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-orgpsych-032414-111341
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0420
https://doi.org/10.5465/19416520.2013.759433
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0435
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11612-011-0170-7
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11612-011-0170-7
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0445


Viswesvaran, C., Sanchez, J. I., & Fisher, J. (1999). The role of social support in the
process of work stress: A meta-analysis. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 54(2),
314–334. https://doi.org/10.1006/jvbe.1998.1661.

WHO (2006). Constitution of the World Health Organization (45 ed.). World Health
Organization: Copenhagen.

Williams, L. J., & McGonagle, A. K. (2016). Four research designs and a comprehensive
analysis strategy for investigating common method variance with self-report mea-
sures using latent variables. Journal of Business and Psychology, 31(3), 339–359.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10869-015-9422-9.

*Winkler, E., Busch, C., Clasen, J., & Vowinkel, J. (2014). Leadership behavior as a
health-promoting resource for workers in low-skilled jobs and the moderating role of
power distance orientation. German Journal of Human Resource Management, 28(1–2),

96–116. https://doi.org/10.1177/239700221402800106.
Winkler, E., Busch, C., Clasen, J., & Vowinkel, J. (2015). Changes in leadership behaviors

predict changes in job satisfaction and well-being in low-skilled workers: A long-
itudinal investigation. Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies, 22(1), 72–87.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1548051814527771.

*Winkler, E., Busch, C., & Duresso, R. (2013). Health-promoting leadership behavior in
unskilled and semi-skilled, culturally diverse workforces. Group Dynamics and
Organizational Consulting, 44(2), 153–169. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11612-013-
0206-2.

Wright, T. A., & Cropanzano, R. (2000). Psychological well-being and job satisfaction as
predictors of job performance. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 5(1), 84–94.
https://doi.org/10.1037//1076-8998.5.1.84.

C.W. Rudolph, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101335

21

https://doi.org/10.1006/jvbe.1998.1661
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30749-5/rf0455
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10869-015-9422-9
https://doi.org/10.1177/239700221402800106
https://doi.org/10.1177/1548051814527771
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11612-013-0206-2
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11612-013-0206-2
https://doi.org/10.1037//1076-8998.5.1.84


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

The Leadership Quarterly

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua

Review

Exploring why leaders do what they do: An integrative review of the
situation-trait approach and situation-encoding schemas
Ryan K. Gottfredsona,⁎, Christopher S. Reinab
a Department of Management, Mihaylo College of Business and Economics, California State University – Fullerton, 5369 SGMH – 800 N. State College Blvd., Fullerton, CA
92831, United States of America
bDepartment of Management & Entrepreneurship, School of Business, Virginia Commonwealth University, 301 W. Main Street, Box 844000, Richmond, VA 23284-4000,
United States of America

A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords:
Leadership
Cognitive-Affective Processing System
Situation-encoding schemas
Mindsets
Goal orientation
Regulatory focus

A B S T R A C T

In order to enhance leaders' effectiveness, it is critical to clearly and accurately understand the underlying
processes that contribute to leaders' decision making and behavior. The traditional trait approach to under-
standing leaders' underlying processing carries limitations and does not capture any of the situational char-
acteristics that may be important. We thus advance the situation-trait approach by introducing the Cognitive
Affective Processing Systems framework more fully into the leadership domain. A primary benefit of integrating
this framework is that it identifies an attribute largely overlooked by leadership scholars, yet foundational to
leaders' processing and behaviors: situation-encoding schemas. We integrate and review decades of research on
four sets of situation-encoding schemas to demonstrate their important role in determining why leaders do what
they do. This consensus shift, novel focus on situation-encoding schemas, and integration of four disparate sets of
well-studied situation-encoding schemas has important implications for leaders' self-awareness, meta-cognition,
effectiveness, and development.

Introduction

Leadership matters. Leaders are responsible for making decisions,
taking action, and creating cultures that help their organizations adapt
and succeed in competitive environments (Bass, 1990; Nadkarni &
Herrmann, 2010; Peterson, Smith, Martorana, & Owens, 2003; Resick,
Whitman, Weingarden, & Hiller, 2009; Waldman & Yammarino, 1999).
Acknowledging this, a primary question researchers and practitioners
face is: “How do we improve the effectiveness of leaders?” This is
particularly important because anecdotal evidence suggests a large
proportion of leaders are not operating as effectively as expected.
Gallup, Inc.'s polling research has revealed that only 22% of employees
strongly agree that their performance is managed in a way that moti-
vates them to do outstanding work (Ott, 2017). The Center for Creative
Leadership reports that over 38% of executives outright fail in the first
18 months (Riddle, 2016). To answer the question, “How do we im-
prove the effectiveness of leaders?” it is critical to understand the un-
derlying processes that contribute to leaders' decision making and be-
havior. Only by diving into the psychology of leadership can we hope to
comprehensively understand why leaders do what they do, which will

ultimately help us train leaders to process and behave in more effective
and optimal ways.

Historically, the emphasis on why leaders do what they do has been
on leaders' traits. This traditional approach implied that leaders' traits
were the primary explanation for leaders' processing and behavior, and
left organizations with two primary options if they wanted to improve
the effectiveness of their leaders: select leaders with the traits more
likely to lead to effectiveness or develop their leaders to possess such
traits. Unfortunately, this early approach carries three assumptions that
have limited leadership development research and practice. These as-
sumptions include: (1) leadership behaviors are a function of relatively
stable characteristics of the person (Michel & LeBreton, 2011; Park,
Arvey, & Tong, 2011; Zaccaro, Green, Dubrow, & Kolze, 2018), (2)
variability of behaviors across situations represent a form of measure-
ment error or internal contradictions (Mischel & Shoda, 2008), and (3)
the manifestation of the leader's traits and the situations they face are
mutually exclusive and opposing influences (Mischel & Shoda, 2008).
While leadership researchers have largely moved away from this tra-
ditional focus of leaders' traits being the primary explanation for why
leaders do what they do, these assumptions still linger and may be

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101373
Received 15 November 2018; Received in revised form 26 November 2019; Accepted 1 December 2019

⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Management, Mihaylo College of Business and Economics, California State University – Fullerton, Fullerton, CA 92831,
United States of America.

E-mail addresses: rgottfredson@fullerton.edu (R.K. Gottfredson), csreina@vcu.edu (C.S. Reina).

The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101373

Available online 27 December 2019
1048-9843/ © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

T

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/10489843
https://www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101373
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101373
mailto:rgottfredson@fullerton.edu
mailto:csreina@vcu.edu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101373
http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101373&domain=pdf


limiting the development of richer perspectives which can more com-
prehensively explain leaders' processing and behavior.

What psychologists and leadership researchers are increasingly
agreeing on is that an improved explanation for why leaders do what
they do must go beyond studying leaders' traits, and instead focus on
the interaction of those traits with the specific situations in which
leaders operate (Bandura, 1986; Higgins, 1990; Mischel & Shoda, 1995;
Mischel & Shoda, 2008). They recognize that instead of the leaders
operating similarly across situations because of their traits, leaders
operate and manifest their traits differently across the various situations
they encounter (Michel & LeBreton, 2011; Park et al., 2011). For ex-
ample, it should be expected for a leader who is generally high in
agreeableness to demonstrate different levels of agreeableness across
different situations—for example one level when negotiating with em-
ployees about where to hold the annual company retreat, and another
level when negotiating a significant business deal. Further, psycholo-
gists do not believe that such variation should be considered “error;”
rather, such variation should be expected, and is likely predictable
(Mischel & Shoda, 2008). Thus, to better understand why leaders do
what they do, we need to better understand the interplay between the
situations leaders encounter and their traits (Fleeson, 2007; Judge &
Zapata, 2015; Mischel & Shoda, 2008). When we take this situation-
trait approach, new and novel insights related to leadership develop-
ment and effectiveness become apparent.

Perhaps the best framework to explain this situation-trait approach
is broadly summarized by a model and meta-theory called “Cognitive-
Affective Processing System” (CAPS). The CAPS framework explains
that how leaders operate in a given situation is based upon cues in the
situation that activates select affect and cognitions within the leader
(broadly categorized as an individual's personality system; Mischel &
Shoda, 1995; Mischel & Shoda, 2008). More specifically, it suggests that
while individuals do not operate similarly across situations, they have
processing and behavioral dispositions that become activated upon
certain cues, causing them to operate similarly and predictably across
situations that share similar cues (Mischel & Shoda, 1995; Mischel &
Shoda, 2008). This framework identifies a commonly undervalued, yet
critical aspect of leaders' operations: the initial intersection between the
leader and the situations they encounter, which CAPS labels the “en-
coding process” (Mischel & Shoda, 1995).

Leaders' encoding process, which largely functions subconsciously,
guides (1) what cues the leaders detect in the situations they encounter;
(2) why those particular cues are detected and not others; and (3) the
activation of specific processing and behavioral dispositions, or re-
peatable and predictable patterns, within the leaders' personality
system (Mischel & Shoda, 2008). As such, leaders' encoding process are
foundational to how they process and operate, and if categorized, can
be used to develop a leader's “signature” (Mischel & Shoda, 2008). We
believe that if we can better understand leaders' encoding process, and
the specific mechanisms that drive it (i.e., situation-encoding schemas),
we will develop more precise leadership development guidance that
involves a novel focus on leaders' encoding process, which has largely
been absent from leadership research and practice.

The purposes of our paper are three-fold. First, we seek to shift
consensus within the leadership literature to more fully embrace this
situation-trait approach in the study of why leaders do what they do. In
doing so, we recognize that the leadership domain has historically
placed emphasis on situational leadership theories. But, these theories
have primarily focused on how leaders need to adapt to their situations
instead of how their situations dictate their processing and behavior,
which has only received scant attention. Thus, we summarize the si-
tuation-trait approach, primarily relying upon the CAPS framework.
Our second purpose is to identify a component in this framework,
leaders' encoding process, as being the most important and founda-
tional component for leaders' operations because it initiates the inter-
change between individual and situation and activates select aspects of
leaders' personality systems (e.g., traits and self-regulatory processes) to

help them best navigate the situations they encounter. Third, we review
four sets of situation-encoding schemas that govern leaders' encoding
process. These schemas activate and guide leaders' processing and be-
havioral dispositions, yet they have largely been overlooked by lea-
dership researchers and practitioners. As such, they are ideal aspects to
focus on for leadership development and promoting leadership effec-
tiveness. One benefit of considering these sets of schemas together is
that they can help identify leaders' “signature” responses across the
situations they encounter, with important developmental implications
including enhancing their ability to be self-aware, operate consciously
(as opposed to non-consciously), and engage in metacognition.

The study of why leaders do what they do

The field of psychology has long investigated why people process
and behave in the manner they do. Historically, psychologists took two
competing approaches, forming two branches of psychology: person-
ality psychology and social psychology (Mischel, 2009). Personality
psychologists focused on identifying internal traits to explain in-
dividuals' processing and operation. On the other hand, social psy-
chologists focused on the situational characteristics to explain in-
dividuals' processing and operation. For many years, primarily in the
1970s and 1980s, these psychologists debated between the “power of
the person” and “the power of the situation,” considering the debate a
zero-sum formula, where it was all or nothing.

Psychologists' contemporary view is now a more accurate depiction
of reality that acknowledges a combination of individual traits and si-
tuational characteristics is what best explains why people operate the
way they do. They believe that there is a dynamic interchange between
situations and individuals' traits, and it is this interchange that best
represents how individuals express their behavior (Bandura, 1986;
Mischel, 2009; Pervin & John, 1999). It is also an interchange that
leadership scholars need to better integrate into their theories and re-
search.

The trait approach

The traditional approach that the leadership domain has taken in
studying why leaders do what they do has been the trait approach,
stemming from personality psychology (Zaccaro et al., 2018). This
approach has a long history that dates back to the ancient Greeks who
believed that some people had the “natures” to be leaders, while others
did not (Plato & Jowett, 1901). Leadership researchers who have taken
this approach have been primarily interested in identifying specific
traits that can be generalized across situations, providing insight for
leadership selection, development, and effectiveness. The significant
amount of research on this topic has resulted in multiple meta-analyses,
allowing DeRue, Nahrgang, Wellman, and Humphrey (2011) to test a
meta-analytic structural equation model of the role leader traits play on
leadership behaviors and effectiveness. They identified personality (i.e.,
the Big Five), intelligence, and gender as being the most heavily studied
traits related to leadership.

This approach carries an assumption that few have questioned:
leaders' traits generally cause them to act the same across situations.
Unfortunately, this assumption, and broader approach, carries sig-
nificant limitations. First, it views variability of behavior across situa-
tions as error and internal contradictions (Mischel & Shoda, 2008).
Second, it construes personality and situation as being mutually ex-
clusive and opposing influences (Mischel & Shoda, 2008). Third, it
overlooks and fails to address the psychological processes and dynamics
that underlie leaders' behaviors (Mischel & Shoda, 2008). Fourth, it fails
to consider that leaders engage in cross-situational consistent patterns
of behavior that differ depending upon the cues of the situation (Michel
& LeBreton, 2011; Mischel, 2009; Park et al., 2011). Overall, this ap-
proach ignores reality: “The person and the situation at any given
moment are inextricably interwoven” (Rauthmann, Sherman, & Funder,

R.K. Gottfredson and C.S. Reina The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101373

2



2015; p. 363). Because of these limitations, the trait approach will al-
ways be limited in its predictive validity of leadership effectiveness, and
they are likely the primary reasons for relatively small correlations
between traits and leader effectiveness (DeRue et al., 2011; Judge,
Colbert, & Ilies, 2004).

The situation-trait approach

The leadership domain is increasingly recognizing the limitations
associated with the traditional trait approach, but theoretical ap-
proaches or frameworks that move the domain beyond this traditional
approach have been slow to develop. Fortunately, the psychological
domain has spent decades studying how individuals' traits interact with
their situation to explain why they do what they do. Thus, there is much
precedent and expected value from applying this situation-trait ap-
proach into the leadership domain. In fact, this approach has been
predicted (Antonakis, Day, & Schyns, 2012) and promoted (Zaccaro
et al., 2018) as a renaissance for the leadership domain.

A framework commonly used to describe the situation-trait ap-
proach is CAPS (Mischel & Shoda, 1995). CAPS is a meta-theory, which
means that it provides a framework for building theories to account for
individuals' characteristic intra-individual behavior and the dynamics
that underlie it (Cervone, Shadel, Smith, & Fiori, 2006; Mischel &
Shoda, 2008). It is able to incorporate “the complexity of human per-
sonality and the cognitive-affective dynamics, conscious and un-
conscious—both ‘cool’ and ‘hot,’ cognitive and emotional, rational and
impulsive—that underlie the individual's distinctive, characteristic in-
ternal states and external behavioral expressions” (Mischel & Shoda,
1998, p. 210–211).

The situation-trait approach and CAPS framework takes a process-
oriented perspective toward personality, viewing it as a process or
system of a unique network of organized interconnections among cog-
nitions and affects that explains why and when a leader behaves dis-
tinctively (Mischel & Shoda, 1994, 1995, 2008; Rauthmann et al., 2015;
Zaccaro et al., 2018). It moves beyond the idea that personality pro-
duces uniformly consistent behavior across situations, and instead
suggests that leaders possess various behavioral processes or patterns
that are characteristic and predictable across situations, depending
upon situational cues (Mischel & Shoda, 1998; Park et al., 2011). It
implies that certain traits (e.g., extraversion) and related behavior may
be utilized more heavily in situations with certain cues than other si-
tuations with different cues.

This approach carries its own assumptions that has unique im-
plications for the leadership domain. First, leaders' context or situation
has significant influence on the expression of their leadership (Zaccaro
et al., 2018). Second, leaders' behavioral tendencies vary in stable and
predictable manners across situational cues, which means that varia-
bility in cognitions and behavior across situations is not viewed as error
or internal contradictions, but as valuable information related to the
leaders' personality processes (Michel & LeBreton, 2011; Mischel &
Shoda, 1995, 2008). Third, every leader will differ in how they encode
the situations they encounter, and their specific encodings will activate
their own unique pattern of processing and behavior (Mischel & Shoda,
1995). Fourth, failed leadership is less about not possessing particular
traits, and more about failing to encode their situations properly and
subsequently failing to recognize the need to employ their traits dif-
ferently across situations (Zaccaro et al., 2018).

Comparing the situation-trait approach to the trait approach, it
becomes clear to see that while they are both seeking to address why
leaders do what they do, they have different motives and focus. The
trait approach seeks to identify the characteristics that explains how
leaders are likely to operate across all situations, whereas the situation-
trait approach investigates the psychological processes that underlie
leaders' individual differences in behavior and its variability across si-
tuations (i.e., how a leader functions; Mischel & Shoda, 1995).

This latter approach allows for a more accurate view of the reality of

human functioning. Assuming variability in behavior across situations
to be errors, the trait approach only offers flat, simplistic, static por-
traits that characterize a leader's average types of behavior. Instead, the
situation-trait approach sees variability to be part of the multi-faceted
nature of human character, and provides a richer, more comprehensive,
and more coherent explanation and understanding of leaders' con-
textualized behavioral expressions (Michel & LeBreton, 2011; Mischel,
2009; Mischel & Shoda, 2008; Park et al., 2011). It explains both
baseline levels of behavior (i.e., behavioral consistency) and patterns of
variability (i.e., behavioral coherence; Michel & LeBreton, 2011).

It has been argued that the trait approach is akin to categorizing an
automobile's dispositions (e.g., clunky or speedy; gas guzzler or eco-
nomical; Mischel & Shoda, 2008). While that information may be
helpful when determining which car to buy, it provides little value for
fixing the car if it is not running properly. The situation-trait approach,
on the other hand, allows for a deeper understanding of what is going
on “under the hood”—the psychological processes and dynamics that
underlie leaders' behavioral dispositions (Epstein, 1994; Mischel &
Shoda, 2008). When one has a knowledge of what is going on “under
the hood,” it makes one more capable of diagnosing and fixing any
issues in operation.

In fact, the situation-trait approach allows for the identification of
leader signatures or profiles representing their characteristic individual
patterns of cognitions and behaviors in response to specific situational
conditions (Mischel & Shoda, 2008). Identifying and awaking to such
signatures has valuable implications for enhancing leaders' self-aware-
ness and development. If leaders can better understand their processing
dynamics, they will be able to more accurately assess and improve the
effectiveness of their processing and operation (Mischel & Shoda,
2008). Specifically, they will be able to anticipate the events and con-
ditions that activate select signatures, allowing them to become more
conscientious of the situations they step into and more conscious of
their reactions and responses to such situations. Altogether, they will be
empowered to modify their processing that underlies any maladaptive
and dysfunctional behaviors.

Modeling the situation-trait approach

CAPS framework

The CAPS framework is the primary model used to capture the si-
tuation-trait approach. A depiction of this framework is presented in
Fig. 1. Broadly, it presents a process explaining why leaders operate the
way they do.

This process begins with the initial interaction between individual
and situation. The situation is full of features and related cues, generally
too many to process effectively. When individuals interact with the
situation, they must identify and interpret a sample of select cues to
start the process of informing the individual how to best navigate the
situation. This is called the encoding process. This reading of the si-
tuation occurs automatically, largely subconsciously, and efficiently
(Bargh, 1997; Kihlstrom, 2004; Mischel & Shoda, 2008).

This encoding process activates a number of affective and cognitive
personal aspects—housed in what is broadly categorized as one's per-
sonality system—in a manner designed to help the individual best na-
vigate the situation based upon the select cues perceived and how they
are interpreted (Mischel & Shoda, 1995, 2008). Mischel and Shoda
(1995, 2008) identify five different categories of affective and cognitive
personal aspects that can potentially be activated as part of the broad
personality system. They include: (1) encoders, which are people's in-
dividualized manner of categorizing information from external stimuli;
(2) competencies and self-regulation strategies, which include in-
telligence and self-regulatory strategies; (3) expectancies and beliefs, or
people's predictions about the consequences of each of the different
behavioral possibilities; (4) goals and values, which provide the basis
for behavior consistency; and (5) affective responses, which include

R.K. Gottfredson and C.S. Reina The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101373

3



emotions, feelings, and the affects accompanying physiological reac-
tions.

The encoding process and subsequent pattern of affects and cogni-
tions within the personality system serves to help individuals assign
meaning to the situations they encounter. This system is complex, in-
volving automatic bottom-up processing, top-down ‘hot’ (impulsive-
affective and ore implicit) and ‘cold’ (reflective-cognitive and more
explicit) information processing, and the five different personal aspects
that range from volatile (e.g., emotions, moods, attitudes) to stable
personal factors (e.g., competencies, personality; Rauthmann et al.,
2015). Altogether, this processing determines how individuals uniquely
experience their situations and determines how they think, feel, and
act, leading to the next step in the process: behavior generation, or
taking action associated and in alignment with the initial encoding and
subsequent processing within one's personality system.

The CAPS framework also suggests that this sequence is circular.
Once the individual takes action as a result of their processing, the
features of the situation can change or new cues can become available,
restarting the encoding process, and reengaging the individual's per-
sonality system. Because of this cyclical relationship, individuals' pro-
cessing interacts continuously and dynamically with the individuals'
social world (Mischel & Shoda, 2008).

The CAPS framework creates space for exploring and explaining the
rich and dynamic processing that underlies leaders' responses to the
situations they encounter. It includes allowing for the explanation for
why a leader behaves differently across situations.

To fully explore such processing and to improve our understanding
of leaders' operations, there are two elements of the CAPS framework
that are vital to understand: the personality system and the encoding
process. We describe each as follows.

Personality system

A primary focus of the CAPS framework has always been on the
description of the personality system. It creates a space for a variety of
personal attributes to interact in a variety of ways in response to the
cues encoded from the environment, explaining behavior across situa-
tions and situational cues. The CAPS framework carries a number of
assumptions about this personality system.

First, it suggests that the affective and cognitive personal aspects
interact in distinct patterns based upon the specific environmental cue
encodings (Mischel & Shoda, 2008). These patterns generally operate in
a distinct sequence, such that the immediate “triggering” of a specific
attribute can in turn “trigger” other relevant aspects of the self
(Hannah, Woolfolk, & Lord, 2009; Fig. 1 depicts a greatly simplified
CAPS pattern). These patterns are processing structures that dictate

one's behavioral dispositions and subsequent behavior (Mischel &
Shoda, 1995).

Second, it assumes that the complex, multifaceted relationships and
interactions between these personal aspects may operate at many levels
of awareness, automaticity, and control (Mischel & Shoda, 1995).
Mischel and Shoda (2008) state that the characteristic reactions of the
personality system to situations are often immediate, non-conscious,
and automatic. But, the reactions can also be conscious and reflective,
involving higher-order cognitive processes. Whether one reacts non-
consciously or consciously may be partly described by the “heat” of the
situation. When a situation is “hot,” or emotionally charged, in-
dividuals' personality system may operate more quickly and non-con-
sciously. But, when a situation is “cold,” or emotionally neutral, in-
dividuals' have the ability to be more contemplative, flexible, slow, and
strategic, allowing for more conscious processing and regulation. Other
characteristics of the individual or situation that can affect the con-
sciousness of one's processing system is the amount of stress within the
individual or situation, the individual's developmental level, and the
individual's self-regulatory dynamics (Mischel & Shoda, 2008).

Third, it suggests that the personality system's patterns are stable
across situations that share the same cues. Specifically, these stable and
predictable patterns are what characterize the personality of an in-
dividual, and underlie their uniqueness (Mischel & Shoda, 1995).

Fourth, it suggests that while the structure of the personality system
can remain stable across situations, it will change readily when the
situational features change or are encoded differently (Mischel &
Shoda, 1995). Thus, the activated pattern of processing can be cate-
gorized as an individuals' personality state, and as environments
change, different personality states are activated (Mischel & Shoda,
2008). This implies that at any single point in time, only a portion of the
individual's self-construct is active, and as different cues are perceived,
other portions of the individuals' self-construct become active (Hannah
et al., 2009).

Fifth, it suggests that individual's variability in processing and be-
havior across situations are not necessarily internal contradictions, ra-
ther potentially predictable expressions of a stable underlying system
that may remain unchanged in its organization (Mischel & Shoda,
1995). This provides the rationale for why, despite having certain stable
traits (i.e., extraversion), individuals do not operate similarly across
situations (i.e., trait approach), but operate similarly across situational
cues (i.e., situation-trait approach).

Sixth, each individual's personality structure is both stable and un-
ique, allowing for the explanation for why individuals with similar
traits operate differently across the same situations. Specifically, this
difference can be explained by the chronic availability and ease of ac-
tivation of particular affects and cognitions and the particular relations

Fig. 1. Model of Cognitive and Affecting Processing System (CAPS)
Enc = Encoding, SRS = Self-regulatory strategies, Exp = Expectancies, GV = Goals and Values, Aff = Affects. Adapted from Mischel & Shoda, 2008, p. 212).

R.K. Gottfredson and C.S. Reina The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101373

4



among them (Mischel & Shoda, 1995).
Seventh, as individuals' repeatedly use and rely upon specific pro-

cessing patterns, they increase in strength, and may even function more
automatically and habitually over time (Hannah et al., 2009). In fact,
Lord, Diefendorff, Schmidt, and Hall (2010) suggest that it is common
for leaders to nonconsciously rely on these habitual processing patterns
for their functioning and operation.

Together, these assumptions have led Mischel (2009) to summarize
the CAPS framework as follows:

“The CAPS model is idiographic in the sense that it is about each
person's distinctive organization and how it is expressed in inter-
actions with the social world. But while intended to capture the
uniqueness of each personality, it is not limited to N = 1. It lends
itself easily to the nomothetic study of types of people who share
common if. . . then. . . behavioral signatures, and similar underlying
processing dynamics, generated by similarities in their CAPS net-
works” (p. 286).

Mischel is alluding to the idea that the personality system is the
“nuts and bolts” of the of the CAPS framework. But, he is also sug-
gesting that if we can better understand and predict why certain pat-
terns or systems will be activated, we can better predict individuals'
processing and subsequent behavior (Mischel, 2009; Mischel & Shoda,
1995). This leads us to the aspect of the CAPS framework that we are
most interested in: the encoding process, which is the intersecting point
between the individual and the situation.

Encoding process

Across Mischel and Shoda's (1995, 2008) explanations of the CAPS
framework, and relative to their explanation of the personality system,
the encoding process has received relatively little attention. Yet, it is a
critical aspect of explaining why leaders do what they do. This is for
two primary reasons. First, it initiates the behavioral process. In order
for leaders to effectively navigate the situations they encounter, they
must first form situational impressions (Edwards & Templeton, 2005).
Since it is extremely inefficient, costly, and time-consuming to process
every possible situational cue, individuals quickly attend to, filter, and
interpret only the information that appears salient, important, and
consequential (Miller, 2007; Rauthmann et al., 2014). Second, and
consequently, the cues that are attended to, filtered, and interpreted are
what activates individuals' personality system in ways unique to the
filtered cues (Mischel & Shoda, 1995, 2008).

Mischel and Shoda (1995, 2008) generally identify the encoding
process as if… then… situation-behavior relations. They suggest that if
certain cues are identified, then specific personality signatures are ac-
tivated. More specifically, the encoding process guides and constrains
the particular patterns of affect and cognitions within the personality
system (Mischel & Shoda, 2008). As such, the encoding process un-
derlies and is foundational to how individuals think, process, and cor-
respondingly behave.

There are two important features of this process to point out. First,
encoding is what brings meaning to an environment – what is hap-
pening, what might have led to the observed state of affairs, and what
might happen (Rauthmann et al., 2014; Rauthmann et al., 2015). The
objects and the aspects associated with an environment are neutral and
without meaning. They only take on meaning once they are perceived
by an individual. For example, a picture of a clown, if unobserved, does
not carry any meaning. But, if observed, can bring a variety of emotions
and cognitions ranging from amused to fear. Second, this encoding
process generally occurs automatically and outside of one's awareness
(Mischel & Shoda, 2008). The purpose of this automatic and non-con-
scious meaning making process is to quickly inform processing, reg-
ulation, and behavior based upon the situational cues (Rauthmann
et al., 2015).

The encoding process is primarily regulated by individuals'

categories for the self, people, events, and situations, which Mischel and
Shoda (1995) label as “encodings.” We label them as situation-encoding
schemas.

Broadly, schemas have been described as patterns of thought that
influence attention and the absorption of new knowledge to quickly
understand one's world (Nadkarni & Narayanan, 2007). They are the
lenses through which individuals interpret information and translate it
into actions (Baldwin, 1992).

Such descriptions seemed to be aligned with the “encodings”
Mischel and Shoda (1995) describe, which (1) explain why individuals
differ in how they selectively focus on different cues and features in a
given situation, (2) initiate and activate the personality system, and (3)
continue to interact with other aspects of the wider personality system
to determine appropriate behavior in response to the situation. We add
the label, “situation-encoding” because there are a wide variety of
schemas that have been studied that occur at different stages of in-
dividuals' processing, and we are most interested in the schema that are
relied upon as the very first step in one's processing, activating one's
personality system.

CAPS experts have yet to identify and categorize specific situation-
encoding schemas. Although, they do state that there is value in doing
so and identify examples of psychological research that has attempted
to do so (e.g., the Implicit Association Test; Mischel & Shoda, 1995).

One of the primary contributions of this paper is to provide clarity
and understanding around individuals' situation-encoding schemas.
Fortunately, scholars have spent decades studying such schemas. While
much of this research validates the important role they play in ex-
plaining individuals' processing, behavioral dispositions, and behavior,
research on specific situation-encoding schemas has been rather iso-
lated across various domains, spanning psychology, management,
education, and marketing. In the next section, we integrate this re-
search to (1) inform readers of the important and foundational role they
play in leaders' processing and operation, and (2) create a framework to
help leaders and those supporting them better identify and understand
the situation-encoding schemas they possess, why they process and
operate in the manner they do, and how to improve their situation-
encoding schemas to enhance their processing and operation.

Leaders' situation-encoding schemas

It has been stated that the information that captures leaders' at-
tention is what determines their direction and decision making, and
ultimately their success and the success of the organizations they lead
(Hambrick, 2007; Hambrick & Mason, 1984). Since leaders' situation-
encoding schemas are the bridge between the leader and their en-
vironment, they play the initiatory role in determining what captures
their attention and their subsequent processing and behaviors. This
means that leaders' situation-encoding schemas are foundational to how
leaders process and operate. Thus, it seems critical that we better un-
derstand just how foundational these schemas are in how leaders pro-
cess and operate, the implications for more fully adopting these
schemas into leadership research and practice, and what specific si-
tuation-encoding schemas leaders can possess and develop.

Foundational role of situation-encoding schemas

The foundational nature of situation-encoding schemas becomes
apparent when we go “under the hood” of leaders' processing and be-
haviors and understand the neuropsychology behind these schemas.
Simply put, situation-encoding schemas are neural networks in the
prefrontal cortex that tap into leaders' associative processing mode
(Diefendorff & Lord, 2008; Smith & DeCoster, 2000). Specifically, when
individuals absorb information through their senses, this information is
quickly sent to the individuals' executive processing system, their pre-
frontal cortex, which functions to maximize benefits and minimize
harm for the individual (Miller & Cohen, 2001; Spielberg, Heller, &

R.K. Gottfredson and C.S. Reina The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101373

5



Miller, 2013). Designed to create efficiencies, the prefrontal cortex
possesses neural connections that stand ready to fire based upon spe-
cific cues absorbed by our senses (Johnson, Chang, & Lord, 2006). The
stronger the neural connections, the more readily and quickly they fire
in response to such cues.

The specific neural connections involved in our situation-encoding
schemas are connected to our associative-, or slow-processing, memory
system (Smith & DeCoster, 2000). Individuals' associative-processing
system uses knowledge accumulated from a large number of experi-
ences to fill in information, quickly and automatically, about the cur-
rent situation based upon similar situations we have previously ex-
perienced (Smith & DeCoster, 2000). As such, this system is responsible
for forming stable, general representations about the various properties
we commonly encounter.

In summary, situation-encoding schemas are neural connections and
networks that are primed to fire when specific cues are detected,
quickly and efficiently interpreting the cues based upon past experience
and knowledge. As neural connections strengthen, so does the auto-
matic and habitual reliance on these specific networks, and the more
likely an individual is to detect and retrieve cues according to the
previous experiences which brought about and strengthened the neural
networks in the first place. These strong neural networks influence and
dispose individuals' focus, motivation, and self-regulation for both the
positive and the negative. While leaders' situation-encoding schemas
increase information processing speed (i.e., create efficiencies), these
situation-encoding schemas also leave them vulnerable to biases and
closed off to alternative perspectives, which can have significant ne-
gative implications for their effectiveness as a leader.

Why situation-encoding schemas have important leadership implications

Although there has been relatively little focus on situation-encoding
schemas within the leadership domain to date, select situation-en-
coding schemas have received decades of research attention across
multiple domains of study including management, psychology, educa-
tion, and marketing. There are at least three aspects of this research that
have important implications for the leadership domain. First, despite
being studied independently, the research on situation-encoding
schemas has demonstrated consistent findings that suggest they largely
dictate where individuals' place their attention, how they process in-
formation, and how they behave. Second, summarizing and integrating
such research and bringing these attributes together under a common
umbrella of situation-encoding schemas can help guide leadership re-
searchers in future scholarship, particularly scholarship related to the
situation-trait approach and the role these schemas play in the leader-
ship process. Finally, a focus on situation-encoding schemas provides
leaders and leadership developers with the novel perspective that if
leaders can become more conscious of their situation-encoding
schemas, they can enhance their effectiveness in at least two ways.
First, knowing about the role situation-encoding schemas play in one's
processing would allow leaders the opportunity to operate more con-
sciously and manually override their automatic and often biased pro-
cessing. Second, since some situation-encoding schemas have more
positive effects on individuals' processing and operation than others,
becoming conscious of one's current situation-encoding schemas would
allow leaders the ability to change and improve upon their non-con-
scious automatic processing.

In this next section, we integrate and describe four well- and in-
dependently-studied situation-encoding schemas into a single source
and review the research on these schemas to demonstrate the founda-
tional role they play in information processing, and subsequent op-
eration. We also summarize the largely limited research that has been
conducted on these schemas within the leadership domain. Together,
this information will allow us to describe and discuss the implications of
situation-encoding schemas on leadership theory and practice in our
Discussion section.

Review of four sets of situation-encoding schemas

Situation-encoding schemas are distinctive processing profiles that
cause individuals to interpret situational cues and activate individuals'
processing dynamics in predictable ways across contexts that contain
the same psychological features (Mischel & Shoda, 1995, 2008). Al-
though not always labeled as “situation-encoding schemas,” they have
been studied for over 30 years across a variety of domains. Alternative
labels for these schemas include: “encoding strategies” (Mischel &
Shoda, 1995), “attractors” (Dinh, Lord, & Hoffman, 2014), “perceptual
input function” (Carver & Scheier, 2002); “orientations” (Elliot &
McGregor, 2001), “mindsets” or “implicit theories” (Dweck, 2006), and
“focus” (Higgins, 1998). Collectively, researchers across domains have
found that specific situation-encoding schemas can be assessed in in-
dividuals, and have been demonstrated to predictably dispose in-
dividuals to specific ways of processing (e.g., self-regulation, goals,
attitudes, decision-making) and operation (e.g., goal fulfillment, beha-
viors, performance).

While there is likely a wide variety of situation-encoding schemas
that could be identified and studied, there are four sets of such schemas
that have received significant research attention: fixed and growth
mindsets, goal orientations, deliberative and implemental mindsets,
and regulatory focus. Until now, these situation-encoding schemas have
been studied in relative isolation from each other. Additionally, there
has been little focus on these attributes within the leadership literature.
Although, in the instances when situation-encoding schemas have been
studied in relation to leadership, the findings have been significant and
meaningful (e.g., Heslin, Latham, & VandeWalle, 2005; Lanaj, Chang, &
Johnson, 2012). We are the first to integrate them into a single source,
and to collectively introduce them into the leadership domain.

Bringing these four sets of schemas into a single source enables us to
develop a framework to help leaders investigate and assess their pro-
cessing and behavioral dispositions, allowing for greater self-awareness
at the foundation of their processing. For leaders, this self-awareness
should empower them to become more conscious and regulatory in
their processing and operation. Further, it should facilitate more spe-
cific predictions of a given leader's reaction to particular types of psy-
chological situations (Mischel & Shoda, 2008).

In this section, we introduce each of the four sets of situation-en-
coding schemas. In doing so, we have three objectives for each set. First,
seek to describe the schemas. Second, we summarize the existing re-
search and evidence demonstrating how each set of schemas influences
individuals' processing and behavioral dispositions. Third, we sum-
marize the limited amount research that does exist related specifically
to the role they play in leaders' processing, behaviors, and effectiveness.
After reviewing these sets of schemas, and in our Discussion section, we
summarize broader theoretical and practical implications for in-
tegrating these four sets of situation-encoding schemas more fully into
the leadership domain.

Fixed and growth mindsets

Fixed and growth mindsets, also called implicit theories, revolve
around a person's lay beliefs about the malleability of their personal
attributes (e.g., ability, intelligence, personality; Dweck, 1986). Re-
search on these mindsets were largely pioneered by psychologist, Carol
Dweck, with most of her research being rooted in the educational
psychology domain. As such, the majority of the research on fixed and
growth mindsets over the last 30 years has occurred in that domain and
its related domains. Across this body of research, mindset researchers
have found that individuals can either believe that people can change
their personal attributes (i.e., growth mindset), or that they cannot
change their personal attributes (i.e., fixed mindset), and that such
beliefs dramatically affect how individuals process and operate (Dweck,
2012).

R.K. Gottfredson and C.S. Reina The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101373

6



Processing dispositions
Fixed and growth mindsets play a deep role within individuals'

cognitive processes. One reason why is that these mindsets represent
implicit beliefs, meaning that they may not explicitly articulated in the
mind of the person holding them. Yet, researchers have found that at
the implicit, largely subconscious level, these beliefs actually (1) dictate
the way people ascribe meaning to their environment and situations,
and (2) prime a range of processing and behavioral dispositions, largely
outside of one's awareness (Burnette, O'Boyle, VanEpps, Pollack, &
Finkel, 2013; Heslin & Keating, 2017).

Interpreting situational cues. Preserving and enhancing a sense of self-
worth is a priority for all individuals (Crocker, Luhtanen, Cooper, &
Bouvrette, 2003). When individuals possess fixed or growth mindsets,
their specific belief about the malleability of their personality attributes
influences how they manage their sense of self-worth (Kamins & Dweck,
1999). Thus, their mindsets cause them to quickly scan for specific cues
to inform them about how to best navigate their environment to
preserve or enhance their self-worth in a manner unique to their
mindset.

Since individuals with a fixed mindset do not believe they can
change or improve their attributes, their self-worth is connected to the
valuable attributes that they possess. They implicitly believe that if they
experience failure, because they cannot develop or improve, such
failure is an indication that they are a failure and of little worth
(Burnette et al., 2013; Dweck, 2012; Kamins & Dweck, 1999; Mangels,
Butterfield, Lamb, Good, & Dweck, 2006). Further, they also implicitly
believe that if they experience success, such is an indication that they
are of value. Thus, wanting to protect their self-worth and image, they
are sensitive to cues that indicate whether the situations they encounter
will threaten or confirm their self-worth. Situations that involve the
opportunity for failure threaten their self-worth, making them sensitive
to cues that suggest uncertainty about their likelihood for success. Such
situations commonly involve what the individual considers to be a
challenge or requiring effort (Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007;
Dweck, 2012; Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Hong, Chiu, Dweck, Lin, & Wan,
1999). On the other hand, if a fixed-mindset individual approaches a
situation and ascertains that success is likely and/or requires very little
effort, they will see the situation as an opportunity to demonstrate their
positive attributes and solidify themselves as someone of worth.

Since individuals with a growth mindset believe they can change or
improve their attributes, their self-worth is connected to their personal
growth and development (Dweck, 2012; Mangels et al., 2006). Thus,
wanting to enhance their self-worth, they are sensitive to cues that
indicate whether the situations they encounter provide the opportunity
for growth and development. The situations that provide the greatest
opportunity for growth and development are the situations that those
with a fixed mindset try to avoid: situations where there is uncertainty
about success, usually challenges or situations that require effort
(Blackwell et al., 2007; Dweck, 2012; Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Hong
et al., 1999).

Together, fixed and growth mindsets seek for similar cues associated
with one's likelihood for success. Specifically, they seek for cues related
to the likelihood for failure (i.e., challenges) and anticipated effort re-
quired for success, but they encode these cues very differently. Those
with a fixed mindset encode challenges and effort as situations to avoid,
whereas those with a growth mindset encode such cues as situations to
approach. These differences are summarized in the top half of Table 1

Activating processing dynamics. One of the primary ways fixed and
growth mindsets influence individuals' processing is that they shape
their self-regulation, which is a core part of individuals' personality
system. Many prominent self-regulation theories (e.g., control theory,
motivation action theory, adaptive resonance theory) rely upon the
notion of a feedback loop to help explain individuals' motivations and
behaviors. The basic premise of the feedback loop is that individuals set

goals, compare their progress against those goals, and make
modifications to their behaviors or cognitions to resolve the
discrepancy between their goals and their current state (Karoly, 1993).

Interestingly, the psychological theories that use feedback loops to
explain motivation and goal-oriented behaviors largely consider the
steps involved in the feedback loop to be a conscious process. While
they surely can be a conscious process, these theories largely overlook
the non-conscious role situation-encoding schemas play in shaping and
dictating the entire feedback loop process. Since situation-encoding
schemas occur quickly, non-consciously, and automatically, they are an
implicit force that shape the three main aspects of individuals' feedback
loops. They (1) influence what goals the individual sets to begin with,
(2) influence the metrics individuals select and use to measure the gap
between their goals and their current state, and (3) guide individuals to
select specific behavioral and/or cognitive options to resolve any such
discrepancy that exists (Smith & DeCoster, 2000). Acknowledging the
underlying role situation-encoding schemas play in this process has led
researchers to suggest that much of our behavior is driven by non-
conscious automatic processes (Bargh, 1990; Bargh & Chartrand, 1999;
Bargh, Gollwitzer, Lee-Chai, Barndollar, & Trötschel, 2001; Wilson,
2004).

In the case of fixed mindsets, to preserve their sense of self-worth,
individuals implicitly develop goals to avoid failure and be viewed fa-
vorably (Dweck, 2012; Kamins & Dweck, 1999; Mangels et al., 2006).
Consequently, they consistently measure and monitor how they are
performing relative to expectations of, and in comparison to, others.
Correspondingly, they are non-consciously directed to avoid failure and
validate their ability (Burnette et al., 2013; Mangels et al., 2006). Thus,
fixed mindsets predispose individuals to self-regulate by avoiding tasks
or challenges where they are uncertain of success (Burnette et al., 2013;
Dweck, 2006, 2012; Hong et al., 1999; Nussbaum & Dweck, 2008).

In the case of growth mindsets, to enhance their self-worth, in-
dividuals implicitly develop goals to learn and develop in order to be
viewed favorably (Dweck, 2012; Mangels et al., 2006). They monitor
and measure their progress through the development of attributes.
Correspondingly, they are non-consciously directed to take on tasks or
challenges where they are uncertain about how successful they will
be—acknowledging that such tasks and challenges are essential for
optimal learning and development (Burnette et al., 2013). In fact, re-
searchers have found that those with growth mindsets are more in-
clined to seek out developmental opportunities and remain optimistic
when struggling with their goal pursuits, when compared to fixed
mindset individuals (Burnette et al., 2013; Dweck, 2006; Dweck, 2012;
Hong et al., 1999; Nussbaum & Dweck, 2008).

Additional evidence of the role these mindsets play in individuals'
regulatory processes is found in how individuals with these different
mindsets compare their performance to others and view feedback.
Researchers have found that fixed-mindset individuals engage in
downward comparisons to see if they outperformed others, while those
with a growth mindset often engage in upward comparisons to learn
from top performers (Dweck, 2012; Nussbaum & Dweck, 2008). Fur-
ther, fixed-mindset individuals tend to view constructive feedback as
being self-defeating, whereas growth-mindset individuals view that
same feedback as valuable information that enhances learning and
development (Mangels et al., 2006; Mueller & Dweck, 1998).

Other ways these mindsets influence individuals' processing dis-
positions revolve around how fixed mindsets make individuals more
prone to biases. Consider the following findings. Because individuals
with a fixed mindset do not believe that others can change, compared to
those with a growth mindset, they (1) are more likely to engage in
fundamental attribution error, believing that others' behaviors are
driven by their traits and are indicative of their underlying moral be-
havior (Chiu et al., 1997; Erdley & Dweck, 1993; Molden & Dweck,
2006); (2) are inclined to be more confident in their attributions of
others and are less likely to change their attributions (Erdley & Dweck,
1993; Plaks et al., 2001); and (3) are more likely to endorse

R.K. Gottfredson and C.S. Reina The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101373

7



punishment, hold stereotyped views, and resist information that coun-
tered a stereotype (Erdley & Dweck, 1993; Gervey et al., 1999; Levy
et al., 1998; Plaks et al., 2001).

Behavioral dispositions
The options for individuals' behaviors are limited to the breadth and

depth of their processing. Thus, it should not be a surprise to under-
stand that individuals behave in a manner aligned with their proces-
sing. We identify several specific ways fixed and growth mindsets dis-
pose individuals to operate in distinct ways.

First, these mindsets shape individuals' disposition toward avoiding
versus approaching challenges. Since the self-worth of those with a
fixed mindset is sensitive to failure, they are disposed to avoid chal-
lenges or situations with potential for failure (Blackwell et al., 2007;
Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Mueller & Dweck, 1998). On the other hand,
implicitly believing that they are malleable and that growth enhances
self-worth, those with a growth mindset are disposed to approach
challenges and situations at risk for failure as opportunities to learn and
grow (Blackwell et al., 2007; Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Mueller & Dweck,
1998).

Second, researchers have found that individuals' mindsets cause
them to develop different strategies for navigating achievement con-
texts (Burnette et al., 2013; Doron et al., 2009; Shih, 2009). Perceiving
achievement contexts as threats to their self-worth, fixed mindset in-
dividuals are inclined to adopt avoidant and self-handicapping

strategies in an effort to self-protect. Those with a growth mindset view
achievement contexts as opportunities for development and mastery. As
such, they are more inclined to adopt problem-solving strategies.

Third and relatedly, individuals' mindsets affect their willingness to
exert effort and persist in the face of obstacles (Blackwell et al., 2007).
Since those with a fixed mindset do not believe that they can improve
their talents, intelligence, and abilities, they believe that efforts to
nurture one's abilities and improve performance are essentially futile. In
fact, for those with a fixed mindset, the need to exert effort is inter-
preted as an admission of a lack of ability (Dweck, 2012; Miele &
Molden, 2010). Thus, if something does not come naturally to fixed-
mindset individuals, they are more inclined to back away from a task
rather than continually invest in the task. On the other hand, since
those with a growth mindset believe that they can improve their talents,
intelligence, and abilities, they see effort as the very instrument for
improving their abilities (Blackwell et al., 2007; Mueller & Dweck,
1998). As such, when something does not come naturally to them, they
are more inclined to persist, believing that success is the result of hard
work, and that even geniuses have to work hard for their discoveries
(Blackwell et al., 2007, Dweck & Leggett, 1988).

Additional findings related to how those with a fixed mindset op-
erate differently from those with a growth mindset include the fol-
lowing: (1) lower motivation (Burnette et al., 2013); (2) progress to-
ward goals less quickly (Compas et al., 2001; Shih, 2009); (3) poorer
negotiation performance (Kray & Haselhuhn, 2007); (4) are more

Table 1
How fixed and growth mindsets influence individual processing and operation.

Fixed mindset Growth mindset Citations

Processing
dispositions

Interpreting situational cues

• Failure threatens self-worth• Sensitive to cues that indicate a
likelihood for failure

• Situations with high likelihood for
success are opportunities to
demonstrate worth

Interpreting situational cues

• Failure enhances learning• Sensitive to cues that indicate a
likelihood for learning and development

• Opportunities for greatest growth
involves challenges and effort

• Blackwell et al., 2007; Burnette et al., 2013; Dweck,
2012; Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Hong et al., 1999;
Kamins & Dweck, 1999; Mangels et al., 2006

Activating processing dynamics

• Develop goals to avoid failure and be
viewed favorably

• Assesses progress by comparing
performance to others

• Predisposed to avoid tasks or
challenges with uncertainty for success

• Seek comparisons to see if they
outperformed others

• Views feedback as being self-defeating• More prone to biases

Activating processing dynamics

• Develop goals to learn and develop to be
viewed favorably

• Assesses progress through personal
advancement and progress

• Predisposed to seek out developmental
opportunities and remain optimistic
when struggling

• Seek comparisons to see how they can
learn

• Views feedback as valuable information• Less prone to biases

• Burnette et al., 2013; Chiu, Hong, & Dweck, 1997;
Dweck, 2012; Erdley & Dweck, 1993; Gervey, Chiu,
Hong, & Dweck, 1999; Hong et al., 1999; Kamins &
Dweck, 1999; Levy, Stroessner, & Dweck, 1998;
Mangels et al., 2006; Molden & Dweck, 2006; Mueller &
Dweck, 1998; Nussbaum & Dweck, 2008; Plaks,
Stroessner, Dweck, & Sherman, 2001

Behavioral
dispositions

• More likely to avoid challenges,
feedback, and opportunities to learn

• Inclined to adopt avoidant and self-
handicapping strategies in an effort to
self-protect

• Less willing to put forth effort in the
face of challenges and difficulties

• Less likely to provide quality and
quantity feedback

• Lower motivation• Progress toward goals less quickly• Lower negotiation performance• More inclined to engage in emotion-
focused coping strategies

• Less willing to receive coaching related
to underperformance

• Fare less positively in challenging
situations

• Set less-challenging goals

• More likely to take advantage of
challenges, feedback, and opportunities
to learn

• Inclined to adopt problem-solving
strategies in an effort to develop and
master

• More willing to put forth effort and
persist in the face of challenges and
difficulties

• More likely to provide quality and
quantity feedback

• Higher motivation• Progress toward goals more quickly• Higher negotiation performance• More inclined to engage in problem-
focused coping strategies

• More willing to receive coaching related
to underperformance

• Fare more positively in challenging
social situations

• Set more-challenging goals

• Beer, 2002; Blackwell et al., 2007; Burnette et al., 2013;
Compas, Connor-Smith, Saltzman, Thomsen, &
Wadsworth, 2001; Doron, Stephan, Boiché, & Le Scanff,
2009; Dweck, 2012; Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Heslin,
Vandewalle, & Latham, 2006; Kray & Haselhuhn, 2007;
Miele & Molden, 2010; Mueller & Dweck, 1998;
Nussbaum & Dweck, 2008; Shih, 2009; Tabernero &
Wood, 1999

R.K. Gottfredson and C.S. Reina The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101373

8



inclined to engage in emotion-focused, rather than problem-focused,
coping strategies (Compas et al., 2001); (5) less willing to receive
coaching related to underperformance (Dweck, 2012; Nussbaum &
Dweck, 2008); and (6) less willing to enter challenging social situations,
and fared less positively in those situations (Beer, 2002). The bottom
half of Table 1 summarizes these findings.

Existing research related to leadership domain
Although most of the research on fixed and growth mindsets exists

outside of a leadership context, the little evidence that is there de-
monstrates that leaders aren't immune to the effects their fixed or
growth mindsets have on their processing and behavioral dispositions,
and select studies have demonstrated that is the case. Specific studies
reveal that those with growth mindsets are more likely to engage in
efforts to develop their followers (Heslin et al., 2006), demonstrate
greater leadership confidence (Hoyt, Burnette, & Innella, 2012), and set
more challenging goals (Tabernero & Wood, 1999).

Considering the breadth of research on fixed and growth mindsets,
we should anticipate fixed-mindset leaders to be sensitive to cues re-
lated to the likelihood of success, adopt goals to support a successful
image, engage in downward comparisons, resist feedback, commonly
engage in attribution biases, seek to avoid challenges and effort, de-
velop self-handicapping strategies, and resist investing in the develop-
ment of others. On the other hand, we should anticipate growth-
mindset leaders to be sensitive to cues related to learning and devel-
opment, adopt developmental goals, engage in upward comparisons,
seek feedback, make sound attributions, approach challenges and ef-
fort, adopt problem-solving strategies, and invest in the development of
others. In all, research has rather conclusively demonstrated that we
should expect leaders' processing, behaviors, and overall effectiveness
to be more positive if they possess a growth mindset compared to a
fixed mindset.

Goal orientation

Goal orientation has become one of the most frequently studied
motivational variables in applied psychology and is a dominant ap-
proach in the study of achievement motivation (DeShon & Gillespie,
2005; Vandewalle, Nerstad, & Dysvik, 2019). The basic premise of goal
orientations is that individuals, largely non-consciously, take on a
specific goal preference or orientation toward their achievement si-
tuations, and the goal orientation they adopt directs their efforts to
support the goal they are oriented toward.

Individuals' goal orientations are generally described as a disposi-
tion that is a “somewhat stable individual difference factor that may be
influenced by situational characteristics” (Button, Mathieu, & Zajac,
1996; p. 28). Additionally, scholars have suggested that individuals'
goal orientations represent neural wiring in individuals' brains, that
when frequently activated become increasingly accessible and even-
tually become chronic in the sense that they are chronically ready to be
activated and acted upon (Bargh & Chartrand, 1999; DeShon &
Gillespie, 2005).

While many conceptualizations of goal orientations exist, most
conceptualizations have primarily revolved around two primary or-
ientations: a learning orientation and performance orientation
(Vandewalle et al., 2019). A learning orientation involves being moti-
vated toward increasing one's competence and mastering something
new. A performance orientation involves being motivated toward
gaining favorable judgements about competence or avoiding negative
judgments about one's competence.

Originally, goal orientation researchers believed goal orientation to
be a bipolar construct, suggesting that individuals could be high (or
low) on one orientation, but not simultaneously high (or low) on both
(Payne, Youngcourt, & Beaubien, 2007). But, since then, research has
established that not only are these two orientations separate constructs,
but that each orientation can be further broken down into two separate

dimensions—approach and avoid—identifying up to four types of goal
orientation: learning-approach (the desire to develop skills and abil-
ities, advance one's learning, and master a task), learning-avoid (the
desire to avoid losing one's skills and abilities, forgetting what one has
learned, or leaving a task unmastered), performance-approach (the
desire to prove one's competence and to gain favorable judgments about
it), and performance avoid (the desire to avoid the disproving of one's
competence and to avoid negative judgments about it; Elliot, 1999;
Vandewalle et al., 2019). However, researchers have historically fo-
cused primarily on a three-factor model involving learning-approach,
performance-approach, and performance-avoid orientations
(Vandewalle et al., 2019).

Although different from other situation-encoding schemas, goal
orientations do share some similarities with fixed and growth mindsets.
Notably, both of these situation-encoding schemas were developed in
the educational psychology domain. In fact, Carol Dweck's foray into
fixed and growth mindsets began with conducting research on goal
orientations and similar constructs, and she eventually suggested that
fixed and growth mindsets may be antecedents to goal orientations,
with fixed mindset being more strongly related to performance or-
ientation, and growth mindset being more strongly related to learning
orientation (Dweck, 1986; Dweck & Leggett, 1988). While this re-
lationship between fixed/growth mindsets and goal orientation has
been largely accepted, it has been largely untested, and meta-analytic
correlations between the two situation-encoding schemas have been
quite small, suggesting that there may not be a causal relationship
between the two situation-encoding schemas and that the two situation-
encoding schemas may be more distinct than thought previously (Payne
et al., 2007; Vandewalle et al., 2019). In fact, for the most part, research
on these two types of situation-encoding schemas have been rather
isolated from each other, and notably, goal orientations have received
significantly more attention within the management domain, enough
for Vandewalle et al. (2019) to review goal orientation research spe-
cifically from this domain.

Like the other situation-encoding schemas, goal orientations have
been found to activate and influence individuals' processing and be-
havioral dispositions, which ultimately have important implications for
leadership. We discuss below and summarize in Table 2.

Processing dispositions
Research across the three most commonly studied goal orientations

has been consistent: learning goal orientation generally has positive
relationships with self-regulatory processes, performance-avoid goal
orientation has overwhelmingly negative relationships with self-reg-
ulatory processes, and performance-approach goal orientation largely
has non-significant relationships with self-regulatory processes (Cellar
et al., 2011; Payne et al., 2007; Vandewalle et al., 2019). We discuss
why this is and specific findings below.

Interpreting situational cues. Although goal orientations are related to
the motivations for achievement within achievement contexts, the
foundation of this motivation is rooted in individuals' appearance of
their competence (Cellar et al., 2011; Dweck, 1986). Effectively, this
means that individuals develop different definitions for success
(Nicholls, 1975; Payne et al., 2007). Success for those with a learning
orientation is enhancing self-perceptions of their competence. Success
for those with a performance-approach orientation is being seen as
being competent by others, often in comparison to others. Success for
those with a performance-avoid orientation is avoiding being seen as
incompetent.

As such, individuals' goal orientations cause them to be sensitive to
situational cues that indicate their likelihood of success in the manner
that they define it. Since those with a learning orientation are primarily
concerned about their self-perceptions of their competence, they seek
cues to indicate that their situation is one where they can make in-
cremental improvements to one's self (Elliott, 1995). Those with either

R.K. Gottfredson and C.S. Reina The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101373

9



of the performance orientations are primarily concerned about others
perceptions of their competence (Cellar et al., 2011; Dweck, 1986).
More specifically, those with a performance-approach goal orientation
want to demonstrate to others that they possess high competence. Thus,
they are sensitive to cues that signal the ease at which one can perform
or succeed relative to others. If cues suggest that they will not perform
as well as others, their processing and behavioral dispositions are in-
clined to avoiding the situation (Elliott, 1995; Payne et al., 2007).
Those with a performance-avoid goal orientation want to avoid de-
monstrating incompetence to others. Thus, they are sensitive to cues
that signal the likelihood of failure and/or the ease at which one can
perform above a minimum standard of achievement (Elliott, 1995;
Payne et al., 2007).

Activating processing dynamics. Since individuals' goal orientations
cause them to define success differently, their personality system is
primed to function in a manner that supports their definition of success
(Diefendorff & Lord, 2008). There are three primary ways goal
orientations have been found to shape individuals' processing.

First, individuals' goal orientations non-consciously underlie and
influence individuals' self-regulation. In a similar fashion as fixed and
growth mindsets, goal orientations shape the goals individual adopt,
how they measure their success relative to their goals, and the actions
they take to address any gaps between their level of success relative to
their goals (Diefendorff & Lord, 2008; Payne et al., 2007). Essentially,
goal orientations explain what goals individuals set, why some people
set higher goals than others, why some people persist longer in the face
of adversity, and why some people tend to avoid achievement situations
(Cellar et al., 2011; Diefendorff & Lord, 2008). In all, goal orientations
activate the processing involved in determining the allocation of effort
in achievement-related situations.

Second, individuals' goal orientations have been found to explain
the learning strategies individuals adopt (Vandewalle et al., 2019).
Specifically, goal orientation researchers have examined two different
types of learning strategies: surface-level strategies (e.g., note-taking,
textbook highlighting, rehearsing) and deep-level strategies (e.g.,
creating diagrams, paraphrasing, and using self-testing exercises).
Across multiple contexts, individuals with a learning goal orientation
tend to use more deep-level strategies, whereas those with performance

goal orientations tend to use more surface-level strategies (Fisher &
Ford, 1998; Simons et al., 2004). Correspondingly, researchers have
found that there is a positive relationship between learning orientation
and transfer of training for those with a learning orientation, a non-
significant relationship for those with a performance-approach or-
ientation, and a negative relationship for those with a performance-
avoid orientation (Blume et al., 2010; Dierdorff et al., 2010; Tziner
et al., 2007).

Third, individuals' goal orientation explains the likelihood an in-
dividual will seek feedback (Payne et al., 2007; Vandewalle et al.,
2019). Researchers have found is that there are both benefits and costs
to seeking feedback. The benefits largely involve gaining information to
improve learning and performance. The costs largely involve poten-
tially exposing one's lack of competence. Those with a learning or-
ientation weigh the benefits much more highly than the costs; and as
such, are much more inclined to seek feedback. Those with a perfor-
mance orientation tend to weigh the costs more highly than the bene-
fits, making them more reluctant to seek feedback.

Some additional ways research has indicated that individuals' goal
orientations affect individuals processing include affecting their state
goal orientations, state anxiety, and specific self-efficacy (Payne et al.,
2007). For example, there is evidence to suggest that those with per-
formance orientations are more anxious than those with a learning
orientation, and such anxiety can affect individuals' behavior and per-
formance (e.g., “test anxiety;” Spielberger & Vagg, 1995).

Behavioral dispositions
Arguably, the most widely studied behavioral disposition studied in

relation to goal orientation is effort. From a theoretical standpoint,
individuals are more likely to exert effort if the situation appears to be
aligned and supportive of their definition for success. But, empirically,
what researchers have found across a wide variety of contexts is that
those with a learning orientation are more disposed to engage in higher
levels of effort and persist longer compared to those with a performance
orientation (Vandewalle et al., 2019). One of the primary explanations
for this consistent finding is that those with learning orientations are
more intrinsically motivated than those with performance orientations
(Vandewalle et al., 2019).

Researchers have also found that individuals operate in predictably

Table 2
How goal orientations influence individual processing and operation.

Performance-avoid goal orientation Performance-approach goal
orientation

Learning goal orientation Citations

Processing
dispositions

Interpreting situational cues

• Success is related to the degree
to which they are not viewed as
incompetent

• Sensitive to cues that signal
likelihood of failure

Interpreting situational cues

• Success is related to being viewed
as more competent than others

• Sensitive to cues that signal ease
to perform higher than others

Interpreting situational cues

• Success is related to enhancing
self-perceptions of competence

• Sensitive to cues that signal they
can advance competence

• Cellar et al., 2011; Dweck, 1986;
Elliott, 1995; Nicholls, 1975; Payne
et al., 2007

Activating processing dynamics

• Self-regulation is catered to
avoid being viewed as
incompetent

• Rely upon surface-level learning
strategies

• Reluctant to seek feedback• Experience greater anxiety

Activating processing dynamics

• Self-regulation is catered to being
viewed as more competent than
others

• Rely upon surface-level learning
strategies

• Reluctant to seek feedback• Experience greater anxiety

Activating processing dynamics

• Self-regulation is catered to
enhancing competence

• Rely upon deep-level learning
strategies

• Seeks out feedback• Experience less anxiety

• Blume, Ford, Baldwin, & Huang, 2010;
Cellar et al., 2011; Diefendorff & Lord,
2008; Dierdorff, Surface, & Brown,
2010; Fisher & Ford, 1998; Payne et al.,
2007; Simons, Dewitte, & Lens, 2004;
Spielberger & Vagg, 1995; Tziner,
Fisher, Senior, & Weisberg, 2007;
Vandewalle et al., 2019

Behavioral
dispositions

• Less effort and persistence• More likely to compete and
refrain from information
sharing

• More likely to cheat• Less likely to adapt to change• Moderate negative relationship
with performance

• Less effort and persistence• More likely to compete and
refrain from information sharing

• More likely to cheat• Less likely to adapt to change• Small positive relationship with
performance

• Greater effort and persistence• More likely to cooperate and
engage in information sharing

• Less likely to cheat• More likely to adapt to change• Moderate positive relationship
with performance

• Matzler & Mueller, 2011; Poortvliet &
Giebels, 2012; Poortvliet, Janssen, Van
Yperen, & Van de Vliert, 2007;
Vandewalle et al., 2019; Van Yperen,
Hamstra, & Van der Klauw, 2011; Van
Yperen, Blaga, & Postmes, 2014

R.K. Gottfredson and C.S. Reina The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101373

10



different ways. First, since those with performance goal orientations are
concerned about their competence relative to referent others, they are
more likely to compete and refrain from information sharing in an ef-
fort to gain a competitive advantage, whereas those with a learning
goal orientation are more likely to cooperate, seeing information
sharing as an opportunity for supporting mutual growth (Matzler &
Mueller, 2011; Poortvliet et al., 2007; Poortvliet & Giebels, 2012).
Second, those with a performance goal orientation are more likely to
engage in problematic and counterproductive behaviors, such as
cheating, in order to promote their competence. For example, Van
Yperen et al. (2011) found that those assigned to a performance goal
condition cheated at nearly twice the rate as those with a learning goal
condition. Finally, research has repeatedly found that those with a
learning orientation are more willing to change and do a better job of
successfully adapting to change than those with performance goal or-
ientations (see Vandewalle et al., 2019).

Recognizing that individuals' goal orientations shape their effort
and operation, it is no surprise that researchers have found significant
relationships between goal orientation and performance. Notably, when
Van Yperen et al. (2014) meta-analytically investigated the relationship
between goal orientation and non-self-reported performance moderated
by setting (work, sports, and education), they found that the relation-
ships were more extreme for work settings compared to education and
sports settings. Specifically, they found that the relationships between
learning goal orientation and performance in a work setting was much
higher than the other settings (r = 0.27 for work and r = 0.13 and
r = 0.17 for education and sports, respectively), and higher than in-
dicated in prior meta-analyses that did not engage in moderator ana-
lyses (Cellar et al., 2011; Payne et al., 2007). The relationship between
performance-approach and performance was r = 0.10, with no differ-
ence across settings, and the relationship between performance-avoid
and performance was r = −0.20 in a work setting and r = −0.14 and
r = −0.04 for education and sports settings, respectively.

As a whole, all of the research on goal orientation led Cellar et al.
(2011) to state: “Thus based on the existing research, we conclude that
the [learning]-approach trait goal orientation may well be the most
desirable orientation in achievement contexts. This is likely the case
because the [learning]-approach orientation results in more frequent
and persistent self-regulation activities” (p. 480).

Existing research related to leadership domain
While most goal orientation research has not been directed at lea-

ders, there is little reason to think that the conclusive results would
differ for a leader population. Based upon the findings described above,
we anticipate leaders with a learning goal orientation will be sensitive
to situations that may enhance their ability to develop, develop goals
focused on learning, utilize deep-level learning strategies, seek feed-
back, be willing to exert effort, cooperate, and perform at a high level.
Those with either of the performance goal orientations will be sensitive
to situations where they can demonstrate their competence, develop
goals focused on performing at a certain level, utilize surface-level
learning strategies, avoid feedback, be relatively unwilling to exert ef-
fort, compete, and perform at a lower level.

In the research that has been conducted on goal orientation related
to leadership, these assumptions have largely been validated. Findings
suggest that goal orientation is likely important for (1) leadership
emergence and development (Dragoni, Tesluk, Russell, & Oh, 2009), (2)
the quality of relationships leaders have with their followers (Janssen &
Van Yperen, 2004), (3) leaders' willingness to embrace change (Payne
et al., 2007), and (4) the behaviors and styles a leader adopts (Coad &
Berry, 1998; Sosik, Godshalk, & Yammarino, 2004). In all, evidence
suggests that a leader's goal orientation non-consciously influences the
effectiveness of their processing and behaviors, and that possessing a
learning goal orientation is most optimal to leader effectiveness and
success.

Deliberative and implemental mindsets

The third set of situation-encoding schemas that we review are
deliberative and implemental mindsets. Like the other situation-en-
coding schemas, this set is concerned with individuals' non-conscious
processing that drives one's goal-related motivations and striving, but it
is rooted in different psychological theories, mainly those associated
with decision-making (Gollwitzer, 2012). Being from a different theo-
retical foundation, research on these mindsets has been largely isolated
from the other situation-encoding schemas even though the effects
found have also been shown to dictate individuals' processing and be-
havioral dispositions.

The initial impetus for studying these mindsets was based on the
idea that as individuals go through the decision-making process, they
generally take on different mindsets (Gollwitzer, 1990, 2012). Origin-
ally, it was suggested that early in the decision-making process, in-
dividuals have a heightened receptiveness to all kinds of information
(i.e., deliberative mindset). But, in the later stages of the decision-
making process, individuals become more selective in their processing,
allowing them to focus on implementing decisions, and thus closing
them off to new ideas and information (i.e., implemental mindset).

With this view, early researchers theorized that when individuals
possess a deliberative mindset, the deliberation they engage in would
deplete their cognitive resources, causing them to perform more poorly
on subsequent short-term memory tasks than those more focused on
implementing decisions (implemental mindset), who likely use less
cognitive resources. However, they found the exact opposite
(Gollwitzer, 2012).

Researchers found that when individuals possess a deliberative
mindset, it activates the brain's ability to explore things outside what
one has been deliberating, causing a heightened receptiveness to all
kinds of information (open-mindedness). And, on the other hand, pos-
sessing an implemental mindset activates the brain's ability to focus on
a single task and deactivates the brains ability to be receptive to new
non-relevant information (close-mindedness).

While initial theorization suggested that these mindsets occur in
different stages of the decision-making process, subsequent research
and theory suggest that they do not necessarily fluctuate as one pro-
ceeds through different decision-making stages. Instead, it is more of a
condition of the mind that affects overall processing (Gollwitzer, 2012).
In fact, most research on these mindsets involve experiments where
these mindsets are manipulated or primed, suggesting that regardless of
where one is in the decision-making process, he/she can possess either a
deliberative or implemental mindset.

Processing dispositions
Like the other situation-encoding schemas, deliberative and imple-

mental mindsets dictate the cues and information individuals absorb,
and in turn, activates different, yet predictable processing dynamics.
We summarize their unique processing dispositions in the top half of
Table 3.

Interpreting situational cues. Similar to fixed and growth mindsets and
goal orientations, deliberative and implemental mindsets are connected
to individuals' perceptions of their worth. In the case of deliberative and
implemental mindsets, individuals are concerned about their rightness.
Those with a deliberative mindset want to make the most appropriate
decisions. As a result, they believe that their value is connected to their
ability to get closer to truth and think optimally. Those with an
implemental mindset think that they are right. As a result, their value
is connected to being seen as being right. Both mindsets are cognitively
attuned to information that confirms or supports their perspective
(Gollwitzer, 2012).

At the encoding level, those with a deliberative mindset are sensi-
tive to cues that indicate an opportunity for improving in one's pro-
cessing and decision making (Gollwitzer, 2012; Gollwitzer, 1990;

R.K. Gottfredson and C.S. Reina The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101373

11



Taylor & Gollwitzer, 1995). They are more primed to explore why one
should do something and information related to the pros and cons of
different possibilities. On the other hand, those with an implemental
mindset are sensitive to cues that indicate their perspective is correct
and that they can proceed accordingly (Gollwitzer, 2012; Gollwitzer,
1990; Taylor & Gollwitzer, 1995). They are more primed to explore
how, when, and where one should do something. Consequently, these
schemas shape individuals' processing as follows.

Activating processing dynamics. Research has found that these mindsets
affect individuals' processing in two primary ways: the degree to which
one engages in biased thinking and one's openness to information.

Relative to those with an implemental mindset, those with a de-
velopmental mindset are more impartial, less biased, and more accurate
in their processing and decision making (Gollwitzer, 2012). Research
has demonstrated this in three primary ways. First, researchers have
found that after making a selection between options, those with im-
plemental mindsets view the non-selected alternatives more negatively
than those with a deliberative mindset (Harmon-Jones & Harmon-
Jones, 2002), leaving those with a deliberative mindset more open to
the value of alternative ideas. Second, researchers have found that
those possessing a deliberative mindset are more accurate judges of
their control or impact over the situations they encounter than those
possessing an implemental mindset (Gollwitzer & Kinney, 1989; Taylor
& Gollwitzer, 1995). When individuals were successful at a task that
they did not have control over (i.e., their success was based on factors
outside of their control), those with a deliberative mindset were more
open to the idea that their success was not fully attributed to them-
selves, whereas those with an implemental mindset tended to believe
that their success was more fully the result of their performance (Gagne
and Lydon, 2001; Puca, 2001; Taylor & Gollwitzer, 1995). This has led
researchers to assert that those with implemental mindsets are more
prone to illusions of invulnerability, and less-accurately perceive their
abilities and probabilities for success (Gollwitzer, 2012; Puca, 2001).
Finally, researchers have found that those with an implemental mindset
are more likely to develop an extreme position, particularly around a
course of action they are implementing. But interestingly, these effects
are not just associated with the issue at hand and have found to carry
over to issues irrelevant to one's goal concern (Henderson et al., 2008).

As mentioned previously, researchers originally conceptualized
these mindsets as being part of a decision-making process. These find-
ings demonstrate that these mindsets are not solely associated with the

decision-making process, but also persist beyond current tasks.
Further, an acknowledged premise of effective decision-making is

that in order to make the best possible decisions, one should (1) be open
to any available information that might inform one's decisions, (2)
avoid prematurely dismissing relevant information, and (3) be willing
to change one's mind in light of new ideas (Fujita et al., 2007;
Gollwitzer, 2012; Heckhausen & Gollwitzer, 1987). Across the body of
deliberative and implemental mindset research, researchers con-
sistently find that those with deliberative mindsets are much more open
to new information and thus more open-minded as a whole, leading
them to be more effective decision-makers relative to those with im-
plemental mindsets. Additionally, those with deliberative mindsets are
more inclined to spot relevant information and engage in less selective
filtering than those with implemental mindsets (Fujita et al., 2007).

Behavioral dispositions
Until now, we have largely presented implemental mindsets in a

negative light. But, research indicates that this mindset is not always
negative (see bottom half of Table 3 for summary). There seems to be
some benefits to having implemental mindsets. Although, as we will
discuss, perhaps these benefits need to be slightly tempered. Research
indicates that those with implemental mindsets are more focused on
implementing a decision, and as such, they are able to exert greater
focus and effort toward a specific course of action than those with de-
liberative mindsets (Gollwitzer, 2012). Specifically, relative to those
with deliberative mindsets, those with implemental mindsets (1) are
faster to initiate goal-directed behavior (Gollwitzer, 2012); (2) generate
greater persistence in goal-directed behavior, particularly when feasi-
bility was deemed low and desirability deemed high, or vice versa
(Brandstätter & Frank, 2002); and (3) demonstrate greater effort and
performance on certain tasks (e.g., scavenger hunt), partly because of
their more optimistic outcome expectations and overestimating the ease
of the task (Armor & Taylor, 2003).

While these findings surely seem positive for possessing an instru-
mental mindset, there are a couple of factors to further consider. First,
while instrumental mindsets seem valuable when one needs to imple-
ment a decision, they do not seem valuable when having to make a
decision. Thus, a tradeoff potentially exists: making the best decision
and possibly implementing that decision at a slower or more thoughtful
pace or possibly implementing a less-than-optimal decision at a quicker
pace. Second, it seems likely that the complexity of the decision and
task needs to be taken into consideration. There are some decisions and

Table 3
How deliberative and implemental mindsets influence individual processing and operation.

Deliberative mindset Implemental mindset Citations

Processing
dispositions

Interpreting situational cues

• Want to make appropriate decisions and
think optimally

• Sensitive to cues that indicate
opportunities for improved thinking

• Primed to explore why one should do
something and related pros and cons

Interpreting situational cues

• Think they are right and want to be
viewed as being right

• Sensitive to cues that indicate their
perspective is correct

• Primed to explore how, when, and where
to do something

• Gollwitzer, 2012; Gollwitzer, 1990; Taylor &
Gollwitzer, 1995

Activating processing dynamics

• More impartial, less biased, and more
accurate in processing and decision
making

• More open to new information, and more
open-minded as a whole

• More inclined to spot relevant information
and engages in less selective filtering

Activating processing dynamics

• Less impartial, more biased, and less
accurate in processing and decision
making

• Less open to new information, and less
open-minded as a whole

• Less inclined to spot relevant information
and engages in more selective filtering

• Fujita, Gollwitzer, & Oettingen, 2007; Gagne &
Lydon, 2001; Gollwitzer, 2012; Gollwitzer &
Kinney, 1989; Harmon-Jones & Harmon-Jones,
2002; Heckhausen & Gollwitzer, 1987;
Henderson, de Liver, & Gollwitzer, 2008; Puca,
2001; Taylor & Gollwitzer, 1995

Behavioral
dispositions

• Exerts less focus, initiative, persistence,
and effort toward taking action

• Exerts greater focus, initiative,
persistence, and effort toward taking
action

• Armor & Taylor, 2003; Brandstätter & Frank,
2002; Gollwitzer, 2012

R.K. Gottfredson and C.S. Reina The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101373

12



tasks that, perhaps because of their obviousness or simplicity, do not
require a deliberative mindset, making an implemental mindset more
beneficial. But, it is important to recognize that, while the weightiest
and most important decisions may be infrequent, often they are quite
complex, and likely require a deliberative mindset. Further, it is im-
portant to recognize that there are some individuals in certain organi-
zational positions that consistently deal with more complex and
weighty decisions (e.g., leaders) who would presumably function more
effectively with a deliberative mindset.

Existing research related to leadership domain
Unfortunately, there has yet to be much research directly in-

vestigating the role that deliberative and implemental mindsets play in
leadership effectiveness, but the implications of deliberative and im-
plemental mindset research surely seem relevant. Gollwitzer (2012)
asserts that deliberative and implemental mindsets have “enormous
influence” on how individuals process information (p. 533). Thus, we
suggest that if leaders' processing and decision-making shapes the di-
rection and success of their organizations, whether they possess delib-
erative or implemental mindsets can have “enormous” implications.
While implemental mindsets do seem to have some positives in terms of
effectiveness in implementing decisions, such mindsets may also leave
one prone to biases and closed to potentially relevant information,
which can reduce the effectiveness of one's decisions in the first place.
Leaders with a deliberative mindset appear much more inclined to be
sensitive and open to new and novel information, and less biased in
their processing. This is surely important for effective decision making,
but it is likely also important for the engagement of employees, as
deliberative mindsets are likely necessary for creating a psychologically
safe and engaging workplace.

Regulatory focus

Regulatory focus theory is a well-studied theory in the organiza-
tional domain that suggests that individuals regulate their cognition
and behavior during goal pursuit, generally to either maximize pleasure
or to minimize pain (Baumeister, Heatherton, & Tice, 1993; Carver &
Scheier, 2002; Higgins, 2001). As such, regulatory focus theory de-
scribes how individuals regulate through two coexisting regulatory
systems that cater to different needs and interests during goal pursuit
(Higgins & Spiegel, 2004; Lanaj et al., 2012; Scholer & Higgins, 2010).
These systems are called prevention and promotion focus and represent
two different goal-striving strategies (Lanaj et al., 2012). Simply stated,
those with a prevention focus are focused on winning, gaining, and
accomplishing, while those with a promotion focus are focused on
avoiding losses (Johnson, Smith, Wallace, Hill, & Baron, 2015).

There have been over 200 studies conducted on regulatory focus
(Johnson et al., 2015). What researchers have found is that individuals'
regulatory foci are situation-encoding schemas that shapes how in-
dividuals view their world and approach their goals, and as such, is a
foundational driver of the affect, cognitions (i.e., processing, strategies,
and tactics), and behaviors individuals engage in to accomplish their
goals (Gorman et al., 2012; Johnson et al., 2015; Lanaj et al., 2012).
While these two forms of regulatory focus are theoretically independent
(suggesting that individuals can be high or low on either simulta-
neously), individuals generally possess a dominant focus as a trait-like
quality (Higgins, 1997, 2000).

Despite some similarity between regulatory focus and the other
perceptual attributes, especially goal orientation, they are considered
distinct (Cornwell & Higgins, 2015). Kark & Van Dijk (2019) explain
that the primary difference between these situation-encoding schemas
is that while both are focused on approaching or avoiding positive or
negative end-states, goal orientation schemas do not distinguish be-
tween different types of positive or negative end-states. By this, they
mean that theory related to goal orientation suggests that individuals
typically approach positive end-states and avoid negative end-states.

Regulatory focus schemas, on the other hand, are concerned with dis-
tinct types of end-states, and suggest that individuals can approach
positive or negative end-states through either approach or avoid ac-
tions.

In Lanaj et al.'s (2012) meta-analysis, the authors summarize the
research associated with regulatory focus as follows: “Based upon the
evidence to date, promotion and prevention foci appear to be important
person-based variables that influence self-regulation and behavior at
work” (p. 999). Much of the research that led them to make this con-
clusion has been focused on how these regulatory foci dictate in-
dividuals' processing associated with their evaluation of their work-
place perceptions and attitudes. This research is largely summarized in
Table 4.

Processing dispositions
Like the other situation-encoding schemas, the regulatory focus

schemas influence both the cues individuals absorb and the activation
of their personality system as described below.

Interpreting situational cues. Kark and Van Dijk (2007) stated that
“regulatory focus theory can be thought of as one of the most
comprehensive motivation theories, since its constructs seem to
comprise a primary element of human motivation” (p. 503). This
primary element involves the non-conscious regulation individuals
engage in to maximize pleasure or to minimize pain. In fact,
researchers have isolated this regulation within the prefrontal cortex.
Specifically, Shah, Higgins, and Friedman (1998) found that promotion
focus is associated with greater left prefrontal activity, and thus positive
thinking and maximizing pleasure, while prevention focus is associated
with greater right prefrontal activity, which drives negative thinking
and minimizing pain.

Specifically, individuals with a prevention focus are sensitive to
cues that indicate the likelihood of negative affect, safety, and security
(Johnson et al., 2015; Kark & Van Dijk, 2007). They are especially
sensitive to cues related to risk. Such cues guide prevention-focused
individuals on how to best fulfill their duties and obligations, maintain
an acceptable standard of performance, and limit mistakes and errors
(Johnson et al., 2015; Johnson & Chang, 2008; Kark & Van Dijk, 2007).
Those with a promotion focus, on the other hand, are sensitive to cues
that indicate the likelihood of positive affect, growth, and accom-
plishment (Johnson et al., 2015; Kark & Van Dijk, 2007). Such cues
guide promotion-focused individuals on how to best fulfill their goals
and aspirations, advance and make progress, and attain their ideal self
(Higgins, 1997). Rather than interpret risk as something to avoid, they
interpret it as being a necessary part of the process of progress and
advancement.

Activating processing dynamics. Since the motivations associated with
each regulatory focus schema differ, it is natural that their processing
differs, which includes their focus, goals, desires, and behaviors (Kark &
Van Dijk, 2007). Those with a prevention focus are motivated to avoid
problems and losses, which leads their personality system to be
programmed for vigilance, avoidance, stability, exploitation, and
maintaining the status quo (Kark & Van Dijk, 2007; Kark and Van
Dijk, 2019). Those with a promotion focus are motivated to seek
winning and gains, which leads their personality system to be
programmed for eagerness, speed, achievement, exploration, and
change (Kark & Van Dijk, 2007; Kark and Van Dijk, 2019).

As most of the research on regulatory focus has occurred within the
management domain, researchers have commonly investigated the ef-
fects regulatory focus schemas have on how employees process and
perceive their work environment, in the form of workplace perceptions
and attitudes that include job satisfaction, commitment, and engage-
ment.

Job satisfaction, affective commitment, and engagement are each
considered to be positive and desired employee perceptions and

R.K. Gottfredson and C.S. Reina The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101373

13



attitudes. The research between the regulatory foci and these outcomes
portrays consistent findings: promotion focus has a strong positive re-
lationship with these outcomes (r = 0.45, 0.45, and 0.49, respectively),
while prevention focus has either a small positive or negative re-
lationship with these outcomes (r = −0.23, −0.04, and 0.06, respec-
tively; Lanaj et al., 2012). The primary explanations for these re-
lationships are that, compared to those with a prevention focus, those
with a promotion focus are more perceptive to positive information,
more intrinsically motivated, and more emotionally connected to their
work because they see work as a way to fulfill their ideal selves, al-
lowing them to go beyond their minimum job requirements.

Continuance and normative commitment have also been studied as
consequences of regulatory foci. These forms of commitment both in-
volve an element of feeling compelled to remain a member of the or-
ganization, and as such, have been theorized to have a stronger re-
lationship with prevention focus. For continuance commitment, meta-
analyses have confirmed that prevention focus has a moderate positive
relationship with continuance commitment (r = 0.31; Lanaj et al.,
2012), while promotion focus, on the other hand, has a small positive
relationship with continuance commitment (r = 0.15; Lanaj et al.,
2012). For normative commitment, meta-analytic results suggest that
promotion focus has a stronger positive relationship with normative
commitment (r = 0.26) than prevention focus (r = 0.12; Lanaj et al.,
2012).

Behavioral dispositions
Similar to perceptions and attitudes, research associated with the

relationships between the regulatory focus schemas and behaviors and
performance are rather consistent. For the most part, those with a
promotion focus seem to outperform those with a prevention focus. This
is largely because those with a promotion focus are more satisfied,
committed, engaged, and motivated to enhance their self-concept.
Specifically, it has been found that compared to those with a prevention
focus, those with a promotion focus set more challenging goals and

exhibit greater persistence, task performance, organizational behavior,
and innovative performance (Gorman et al., 2012; Higgins & Spiegel,
2004; Lanaj et al., 2012). In fact, for each of these types of performance,
relationships with promotion focus are moderately positive (ranging
between r = 0.28 and 0.30), while relationships with prevention focus
are largely nonexistent (ranging from r = −0.04 to 0.04; Lanaj et al.,
2012). In addition, meta-analyses reveal that promotion focus has a
moderate negative relationship with counterproductive work behaviors
(CWBs; r = −0.19), while prevention focus has a moderate positive
relationship with CWBs (r = 0.25; Lanaj et al., 2012).

Overwhelmingly, research has consistently found that those with a
promotion mindset outperform those with a prevention mindset.
However, there is one area where this is not the case. Based upon meta-
analytic results, it appears there is one primary behavioral benefit to
possessing a prevention focus, which is that it has a strong positive
relationship with safety performance (r = 0.51), while promotion focus
has a small-moderate negative relationship with safety performance
(r = −0.15; Lanaj et al., 2012). This is largely because those with a
prevention mindset are mentally cued to safety and security, and are
more vigilant to safety-related issues.

Existing research related to leadership domain
Leader's regulatory focus has been found to have important im-

plications for how the leader operates, their influence on those they
lead, and even the success of an organization. In terms of the influence
of regulatory focus schemas on how leaders operate, researchers have
found that those with a promotion focus are viewed more as transfor-
mational leaders, possessing greater motivation for accomplishments
and aspirations, whereas those with a prevention focus are viewed more
as transactional leaders, seeking to maintain order and stability in the
workplace (Johnson et al., 2015; Kark & Van Dijk, 2007).

Related to the influence of leaders' regulatory focus schemas on
those they lead, when leaders possess a promotion focus, their followers
become more sensitive to positive outcomes, more likely to develop

Table 4
How regulatory foci influence individual processing and operation.

Prevention focus Promotion focus Citations

Processing
dispositions

Interpreting situational cues

• Seeks to minimize pain• More prone to negative thinking• Sensitive to cues that indicate the likelihood of negative
affect, safety, and security

• Focused on fulfilling duties and obligations,
maintaining acceptable standards of performance, and
limiting mistakes and errors

Interpreting situational cues

• Seeks to maximize pleasure• More prone to positive thinking• Sensitive to cues that indicate the likelihood of
positive affect, growth, and accomplishment

• Focused on accomplishing goals and aspirations,
advancing and making progress, and fulfilling one's
ideal self

• Higgins, 1997; Johnson
et al., 2015; Kark & Van
Dijk, 2007

Activating processing dynamics

• Motivated to avoid problems and losses, programming
them for vigilance, avoidance, stability, exploitation,
and maintaining status quo

• Negative and/or weak relationships with job
satisfaction, affective commitment, and engagement

• Moderate positive relationship with continuance
commitment

• Small positive relationship with normative commitment

Activating processing dynamics

• Motivated to seek winning and gains,
programming them for eagerness, speed,
achievement, exploration, and change

• Strong positive relationships with job satisfaction,
affective commitment, and engagement

• Small positive relationship with continuance
commitment

• Moderate positive relationship with normative
commitment

• Kark & Van Dijk, 2007; Kark
and Van Dijk, 2019; Lanaj
et al., 2012

Behavioral
dispositions

• Generally underperforms relative to those with a
promotion focus

• Less likely to set goals and exhibit persistence• Small or non-significant relationships with task
performance, organizational behavior, and innovative
performance

• Moderate positive relationship with counterproductive
work behaviors

• Strong positive relationship with safety performance

• Generally outperforms those with a prevention
focus

• Sets more challenging goals and exhibit greater
persistence

• Moderate positive relationships with task
performance, organizational behavior, and
innovative performance

• Moderate negative relationship with
counterproductive work behaviors

• Moderate negative relationship with safety
performance

• Gorman et al., 2012;
Higgins & Spiegel, 2004;
Lanaj et al., 2012

R.K. Gottfredson and C.S. Reina The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101373

14



preferences for change, are more committed, and engage in higher le-
vels of performance demonstrated through risk-taking, creativity, and
efficiency (Kark & Van Dijk, 2007; Kark & Van Dijk, 2019; Kark, Van
Dijk, & Vashdi, 2018). On the other hand, when leaders possess a
prevention focus, their followers become more sensitive to negative
outcomes, more likely to develop preference for stability, are less
committed, and less likely to take risks and be creative (Kark et al.,
2018; Kark & Van Dijk, 2007; Kark & Van Dijk, 2019).

There is also evidence that leaders' regulatory focus affects organi-
zational performance. Regulatory focus scholars have suggested that
leaders are the meaning makers in their organization, such that their
personal goals frame the goals of their organizations (Brockner &
Higgins, 2001; Johnson et al., 2015). As such, it has been posited that
the regulatory focus of organizations' top management teams shapes
their organizations' and workforces' goal pursuit strategies (including
employees' dominant regulatory focus stance), capacity to be agile and
implement change, and engagement in corporate knowledge manage-
ment systems (Arazy & Gellatly, 2012; Kark et al., 2018; Kark & Van
Dijk, 2007; Spanjol, Tam, Qualls, & Bohlmann, 2011; Taylor-Bianco &
Schermerhorn, 2006). In fact, there have been multiple studies that
have demonstrated that firms with promotion-focused CEOs outperform
firms with prevention-focused CEOs (Kammerlander, Burger, Fust, &
Fueglistaller, 2015; Wallace, Little, Hill, & Ridge, 2010).

Summary of the four sets of situation-encoding schemas

Upon identifying, describing, and summarizing the research asso-
ciated with the four sets of situation-encoding schemas, we feel it is
important to bring attention to four broad observations. First, there has
been decades of research studies supporting the foundational role that
these four situation-encoding schemas play in how people and leaders
process and behave. Second, the amount of research on these schemas
related to leadership is relatively small, and additional research is not
only needed, but, we believe, will prove quite fruitful. Third, alto-
gether, the existing research strongly supports the idea that certain si-
tuation-encoding schemas are more conducive to leadership effective-
ness (e.g., growth mindset, learning orientation, deliberative mindset,
and promotion focus) than other schemas (e.g., fixed mindset, perfor-
mance orientation, implemental mindset, and prevention focus), which
has important development implications. Fourth, while we seem to
know some schemas are more conducive for success than others, we
currently have little research or understanding regarding how the dif-
ferent schemas are related. While some research has pointed toward
some natural consistencies between schemas (e.g., Lanaj et al., 2012;
Payne et al., 2007; Vandewalle et al., 2019), their relationships with
each other needs to be further explored. We further elaborate this point
later in our Discussion section. Altogether, we believe substantial evi-
dence exists for more fully integrating situation-encoding schemas into
our research and conversations related to the important ingredients of
effective leadership.

Before moving on, it is important to acknowledge that while in-
dividuals' situation-encoding schemas generally dictate their processing
and behavioral dispositions, it seems likely that certain situations may
be strong enough for these individuals to overcome their natural
schematic tendencies. For example, individuals may normally possess a
performance orientation, but if they are required to learn or master
some material (e.g., to pass a bar or certified public accounting exam),
the situation may elicit a learning orientation. In fact, as we will discuss
below, research across these schemas has demonstrated that relatively
simple interventions designed to elicit more positive situation-encoding
schemas generally will lead to at least a short-term positive shift in one's
processing and behaviors (for example, see Blackwell et al., 2007;
Gollwitzer, 1993; Kilduff & Galinsky, 2013; Kray & Haselhuhn, 2007).

Discussion

Our paper had three purposes: (1) to shift consensus within the
leadership literature away from the more traditional trait-approach
toward the more modern situation-trait approach to better understand
why leaders do what they do, (2) identify situation-encoding schemas
as being critical and foundational components that explain why leaders
process and operate uniquely across the situations they encounter, and
(3) integrate and review research on four types of situation-encoding
schemas to more fully introduce these schemas into the leadership
domain. We summarize these contributions in preparation for dis-
cussing the important implications they have for leadership research
and practice.

In the first section, entitled “The Study of Why Leaders Do What
They Do,” we identify that leaders' traits have been a traditional focus
for explaining how leaders operate. This approach has a number of
limitations which may limit our ability to gain a complete under-
standing for why leaders process and behave the ways that they do. For
example, the trait approach assumes that leaders' variations in behavior
across situations are assumed to be “errors,” as opposed to valuable
information into how they process and behave. Acknowledging these
limitations, we integrate the CAPS framework from psychology to ad-
vance and build the case for a robust approach to understanding leader
effectiveness which utilizes the situation-trait approach. It carries its
own assumptions suggesting that when explaining leaders' processing
and behaviors, it is necessary to consider both the situation and how it
interacts with leaders' traits.

We cover the CAPS framework in our second section: “Modeling the
Situation-Trait Approach.” The CAPS framework suggests that why in-
dividuals operate in the manner they do begins with how they encode
unique cues in the situations they encounter. This encoding activates
individuals' personality system, which in turn, causes the individual to
behave and navigate the situation in a manner aligned with the per-
sonality system's processing. As such, the encoding process is founda-
tional to and directs the leaders' personality system. The personal at-
tributes that guide individuals' encoding process are situation-encoding
schemas, making these attributes a crucial and foundational component
of individuals' processing and behavior.

In the third section, entitled “Leaders' Situation-encoding Schemas,”
we demonstrate just how foundational these attributes are in leaders'
processing by “going under the hood” and summarizing the neu-
ropsychology behind these schemas. Specifically, we identify situation-
encoding schemas as neural networks in the prefrontal cortex that tap
into leaders' associative processing mode. As such, they automatically
and largely non-consciously direct leaders' cue-seeking and processing
activation. Being foundational to how leaders view their environments
and subsequently how they process and behave relative to their per-
ception of their environments, we suggest that better understanding
leaders' situation-encoding schemas and integrating them more fully
into the leadership literature will have important and meaningful im-
plications for leadership research and practice. Thus, it is important to
identify specific situation-encoding schemas that underlie leaders'
processing and behaviors.

In the fourth section, entitled “Review of Four Sets of Situation-
Encoding Schemas,” we identify and integrate research on four sets of
situation-encoding schemas that have been independently studied for
decades across various research domains: fixed and growth mindsets,
goal orientations, deliberative and implemental mindsets, and reg-
ulatory focus. Despite being studied independently, research across
these schemas has repeatedly found that they do dictate individuals'
processing dispositions (cue-encoding and activating the personality
system) and behavioral dispositions. As such, they are likely to have
important implications for leadership, and we summarize the research
to date and integrating these previously independently-studied schemas
into one source.

R.K. Gottfredson and C.S. Reina The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101373

15



Implications for leadership

By understanding the situation-trait approach, the CAPS framework,
the encoding process, and situation-encoding schemas that direct the
encoding process, we are able to come to a more clear and accurate
understanding of the complexity of leaders' operations. Further, it al-
lows us to more clearly identify situation-encoding schemas to be a
foundational component behind leaders' processing and operation. This
has a variety of important implications that include: enhancing leaders'
self-awareness, improving leaders' meta-cognition, improving leader-
ship effectiveness, and improving leadership development.

Enhancing leaders' self-awareness
Remarkably, until this point, leadership researchers have largely

treated the variation of leader behaviors as error and eliminated it by
simply averaging behavior over diverse situations (Mischel & Shoda,
1995). But, with the situation-trait approach and CAPS theory, it be-
comes possible to identify meaningful stable situation-behavior (i.e.,
if… then…) profiles activated by situation-encoding schemas that
predictably explain variations in behavior across situations (Mischel &
Shoda, 1995). Since the leadership domain has largely not considered
the situation-trait approach or foundational role situation-encoding
schemas play in leaders' processing and operation, leaders have largely
lacked a framework to help them understand why they do what they do
across the various situations they encounter, and we suggest that the
current framework provides the opportunity for greater clarity and self-
awareness.

In particular, we have identified four sets of situation-encoding
schemas that dispose leaders to specific processing and behaviors. Each
of these sets identifies at least two possible schemas, but research
suggests that leaders tend to rely on a single dominant schema for their
encoding system. If leaders can identify the schema that they possess,
they can better understand why they are disposed to process and be-
have in the manners that they do across different situations. Further,
across the research on these different sets of situation-encoding
schemas, research has made it quite clear that certain schemas lead to
better processing and behavior than other schemas. This allows leaders
to determine if they are disposed to process and behave in the most
effective ways.

If we put all four sets of schemas together into a single framework, it
allows leaders to develop a multifaceted profile of their processing
system. Are they fixed- or growth-minded, learning- or performance-
oriented, deliberative- or implemental-minded, and promotion- or
prevention-focused? Knowing their profile, leaders and those who
support them can develop inferences related to the leaders' underlying
structure and dynamics and better understand why leaders process and
behave in the specific manner they do (Mischel & Shoda, 1995). This
has three important implications for the leadership domain that we
discuss next.

Improving leaders' meta-cognition
Meta-cognition is defined as deliberate, planned, intentional, goal-

directed, and future-oriented mental processing that can be used to
accomplish cognitive tasks (Flavell, 1979). When leaders understand
how they are disposed to process and operate, it provides them with the
opportunity to become more conscious about how they process and
operate.

Specifically, there are at least three benefits of leaders under-
standing their situation-encoding profile (Mischel & Shoda, 1995). First,
they can better predict the events and conditions that will activate
certain dispositions, helping them to be more strategic about their de-
cision making. Second, they can become more conscious of the situa-
tions they put themselves in, helping them avoid situations that bring
out negative processing and behavioral dispositions and approach si-
tuations that bring out their positive processing and behavioral dis-
positions. Third, knowing what cues they are naturally attuned to, they

can consciously seek after other cues that they do not normally pay
much attention to, expanding the range of their processing and options
for behavior. In all, with a greater ability to meta-cognate about their
situation-encoding schemas, leaders will be more empowered to meet
their role demands in their most effective ways (Hannah et al., 2009).

Improving leaders' effectiveness
As leaders improve in their self-awareness, they enhance their be-

havioral freedom and their ability to operate more consciously, instead
of falling back into non-conscious and predictable patterns of proces-
sing and behaviors (Mischel & Shoda, 1995). Thus, as leaders get to
know their situation-encoding schemas, various options for improving
their effectiveness become available (Mischel & Shoda, 1995, 2008).
First, by understanding what schemas they currently possess and what
schemas are most ideal for leader effectiveness, leaders can seek to
more fully adopt the schemas most ideal for leader effectiveness. As
leaders make improvements to their schemas, naturally their processing
and behavior will improve, making them more effective. Second, by
understanding the cues one naturally seeks, and what other cues might
be helpful for improved processing and behaviors, leaders can con-
sciously seek after different cues to disrupt their typical personality
system patterns. Third, by understanding the situations that activate
less-effective and more-effective processing and behavior, leaders can
consciously select the situations to which they expose themselves to
bring out their best.

Improving leaders' development
One of the great things about focusing on situation-encoding

schemas in light of leadership development and effectiveness is that
there is ample evidence that individuals can change and improve their
schemas, and when they do, there is a corresponding improvement in
their processing and behaviors (Mischel & Shoda, 2008). And often,
research has repeatedly found that leaders' situation-encoding schemas
can be improved through relatively simple interventions, such as:
reading fictional studies (Kray & Haselhuhn, 2007), writing two para-
graphs (Kilduff & Galinsky, 2013), watching a three-minute video
(Crum, Salovey, & Achor, 2013), imagining responses to situations
(Gollwitzer, 1993; Gregory, Cialdini, & Carpenter, 1982; Linville &
Clark, 1989; Mischel & Shoda, 2008) or engaging in a training
(Blackwell et al., 2007; Crum & Langer, 2007; Yeager et al., 2019). For
example, Kilduff and Galinsky (2013) found that individuals asked to
write two paragraphs about their aspirations and ambitions (priming a
promotion focus) were more proactive in their behaviors and achieved
higher social status than those asked to write two paragraphs about
their duties and obligations (priming a prevention focus).

The basic idea is that when an individual is primed to encode their
situations differently, they are activating and strengthening neural con-
nections in their prefrontal cortex that may not fire as rapidly as their
dominant situation-encoding neural connections. Knowing that neural
connections strengthen and operate more rapidly the more they get used,
it suggests that shifting a leaders' situation-encoding schemas requires
regular primes or interventions, which over time strengthens their less-
dominant but more positive schemas, making them more dominant and
having lasting positive implications for their subsequent processing and
behavioral dispositions (Gioia & Poole, 1984; Mischel & Shoda, 1995).

Understanding these dynamics uncovers three things that leaders or
those who develop leaders can do to help leaders shift from less-than-
optimal situation-encoding schemas (fixed mindset, performance or-
ientation, implemental mindset, and prevention focus) to more optimal
situation-encoding schemas (growth mindset, learning orientation, de-
liberative mindset, and promotion focus) to develop more effective
processing and behaviors, and overall effectiveness. First, help leaders
understand the role their situation-encoding schemas play in their
processing and behavior. Without this understanding, it will be difficult
to have the motivation to focus on situation-encoding schemas as a way
to develop. Second, help leaders identify and distinguish between less-

R.K. Gottfredson and C.S. Reina The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101373

16



than-optimal situation-encoding schemas and more optimal situation-
encoding schemas. This will help leaders become more conscious of
their situation-encoding schemas and the quality of their current si-
tuation-encoding schema profiles and it will help them identify areas
for development and improvement. Third, develop interventions and
initiatives to help leaders adopt the more optimal situation-encoding
schemas. These interventions and initiatives should be designed to ex-
ercise and strengthen the neural connections associated with the more
optimal situation-encoding schemas. As those neural connections are
strengthened, leaders will come to rely upon them more frequently,
improving their processing and behavioral dispositions.

We must point out that this approach to leadership development has
not been available under the trait and behavior approaches that lea-
dership scholars have traditionally leaned upon. When scholars have
focused on leaders' traits and behaviors, the practical developmental
implications all relate to improving select traits and behaviors. But,
what the situation-trait approach reveals is that even if a leader can
make shifts in traits and behaviors, if they continue to encode their
situations in the same ways, development in traits and behaviors may
be limited and may not translate into any greater leader effectiveness.
This is what CAPS experts were referring to when they stated that the
traditional trait approach may help when determining which car to buy
(i.e., leader to select), but that it provides little value for fixing the car if
it is not running properly (Epstein, 1994; Mischel & Shoda, 2008). The
situation-trait approach allows us to get “under the hood” of leaders'
psychological processes and dynamics and to work on any of the pro-
cessing that may not be functioning properly.

Finally, while we have focused primarily on the encoding process, it
is important to step back and more broadly consider the implications
that improving one's situation-encoding schemas might have on the
CAPS framework. While it is easy to suggest that leadership effective-
ness will naturally improve when leaders improve their situation-en-
coding schemas, the reality is likely more complex. When leaders im-
prove their schemas, these new schemas may activate different
elements of the leaders' personality systems (e.g., cognitions, affect,
competencies, expectancies, and goals). As a consequence, it is possible
that the leaders' entire personality system will be restructured, for both
the positive or the negative. For example, the new schemas may trigger
more positive self-efficacy beliefs, opening up new expectancies and
goals. But, they may also trigger anxiety associated with perceiving
situations in new, unproven, and uncertain ways, stifling the positive
impact of the new schemas. Thus, while we are promoting the value of
an increased focus on the encoding system and situation-encoding
schemas, at least two important leadership implications exist beyond
this system and schemas. First, while improving situation-encoding
schemas may be an important answer for developing leaders, it is not
the entire answer. Effective leadership development will require both
developing new “if…then…” signatures and subsequent restructuring
within the personality system. Second, understanding the broader CAPS
framework will help leaders develop greater self-awareness and meta-
cognitive skills beyond their encoding processing. More specifically,
understanding the entirety of the CAPS framework will also help lea-
ders to become more self-aware of their personality system and develop
improved metacognitive skills to ensure that the changes in their
schemas result in improved processing and behavioral dispositions.

Further theoretical implications
One of the major purposes of this paper is to help the leadership

literature shift consensus more completely away from the trait-ap-
proach and toward the situation-trait approach. There are a variety of
theoretical implications related to this shift. First, it aligns the leader-
ship literature with the most current thought and theories from the
psychological domain. Second, it provides a more accurate foundation
and perspective for explaining why leaders do what they do. Third, this
approach introduces new questions and new constructs (i.e., situation-
encoding schemas) to focus on for the development and effectiveness of

leaders, which both broadens and deepens the pool of important in-
gredients of effective leadership, and should lead to further theoretical
insights and development.

Future research

One of the values of the CAPS framework is that it is a meta-theory,
providing a context by which new theories that explain various ele-
ments of leaders' processing and behavioral manifestations can be de-
veloped. While CAPS provides a general understanding of the processes
that underly leadership behavior, there is still much research needed to
fully explain these processes. In other words, future research is needed
to better map leaders' encoding process, personality system, and be-
havioral manifestations. There is complexity for each, especially lea-
ders' personality system which can involve a variety of different factors
that form leaders' patterns of processing. Mischel and Shoda (1995)
state: “The relationships among the person's important encodings, be-
liefs and expectations (e.g., about the self), the enduring goals pursued,
the key strategies used, and the affects experienced, all in relation to
relevant features of situations, become the terrain [psychologists and
leadership researchers] need to map” (p. 259).

By presenting situation-encoding schemas more fully into the lea-
dership domain, a natural question is: what is the value of these
schemas relative to what we are already studying, namely leadership
traits and behaviors? Thus, moving forward, leadership researchers
should investigate what variance situation-encoding schemas account
for above and beyond the leadership traits and behaviors currently
studied.

Additionally, leadership researchers should more fully investigate
the relationships between situation-encoding schemas and leadership
traits and behaviors. Are situation-encoding schemas antecedents to
both leadership traits and behaviors, with leadership traits and beha-
viors mediating the relationship between situation-encoding schemas
and leadership effectiveness?

Leadership researchers should also investigate the degree to which
followers can accurately assess leaders' situation-encoding schemas,
and what role their evaluations of their schemas plays in their eva-
luation of the effectiveness of their leader. Mischel and Shoda (2008)
argue that observers are interested in and sensitive to others' general-
ized behavioral tendencies, and are inclined to identify their if…then…
situation-behavior profiles, or what we call situation-encoding schemas.
Thus, this seems like a ripe area for future research, and would add
breadth to our understanding of how followers' perceptions of their
leaders affect their responsiveness to their leader, as well as their
overall work climate.

Further, it would be valuable to have a clearer understanding sur-
rounding the relationships between the four different situation-en-
coding schemas. It has been theoretically suggested and largely ac-
cepted that fixed and growth mindsets lead to the different goal
orientations, but there has been little empirical support for this re-
lationship (Payne et al., 2007; Vandewalle et al., 2019). But, we do
have empirical evidence that there is a relationship between the goal
orientation schemas and the regulatory focus schemas (Lanaj et al.,
2012). Beyond that, we have little clarity if and how these different
schemas may be related. It is thus important to better understand the
relationships between schemas, as this would have important devel-
opmental implications. If they are related, then perhaps they can be
built up simultaneously via broad approaches to improving any situa-
tion-encoding schemas. If they are more independent, this would sug-
gest that organizations need to gain clarity on what specific negative
situation-encoding schemas their leaders dominantly possess, and pro-
vide a tailored developmental program specifically for the most limiting
schemas.

Finally, we acknowledge that the four situation-encoding schemas
that we have focused on in the present review do not exhaustively
encompass the breadth of situation-encoding schemas that shape

R.K. Gottfredson and C.S. Reina The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101373

17



leaders processing and behavioral dispositions. Thus, future research
should seek to identify other schemas that may influence the cues
leaders absorb and correspondingly activate their personality system.

Methodological considerations
There are also important methodological implications that accom-

pany our current work. As researchers continue to embrace the situa-
tion-trait approach and leverage the strengths of the CAPS framework
to guide such research, they will have to give special attention to which
measurement techniques they use in order to capture the dynamic
nature of situation encoding schemas. One such approach that is
especially well-suited for this use is experience sampling methodology
(ESM; also called ecological momentary assessments). Utilizing this
approach, researchers can capture work behavior from respondents at
multiple times during the day in situ (Hormuth, 1986), which allows for
the investigation of both between- and within-person variability of
constructs. Further benefits of this approach include capturing multiple
data points for each variable over time which can reduce the number of
third variable explanations and aid researchers in understanding the
dynamic relationships between variables (Beal & Weiss, 2003).

To further disentangle and understand the relationships among the
four situation-encoding schemas discussed in this review, collecting
responses from participants throughout the day to gain insight into how
decisions and behaviors result from unique combinations of cognitive
and affective states, could prove quite informative in better under-
standing how and why leaders do what they do. This within-person
analysis considers variation in constructs around an individual's own
mean level of a construct (effectively capturing situational variation),
and this approach can effectively be paired with trait-level measure-
ment to model the combined effect of trait and state levels of a con-
struct on leader behaviors (see Hektner, Schmidt, & Csikszentmihalyi,
2007 for an overview of ESM). In sum, ESM is especially well-suited for
asking and answering research questions in which different types of
personal attributes (e.g., trait and state attributes) together inform
leader behavior, which is aligned with the complexity and strength of
the CAPS framework.

A second methodological approach that could be used to advance
research on the four situation-encoding schemas is latent profile ana-
lysis (LPA; Marsh, Lüdtke, Trautwein, & Morin, 2009; Muthén &
Muthén, 2000). This approach is a form of cluster analysis in which
researchers can uncover hidden groups that exist within observed data.
For example, researchers could ask whether there are certain “clusters”
or “signatures” that exist across people in which they exhibit certain
levels of each of the four situation-encoding schemas. It could be that a
unique combination of these schemas can predict additional variance in
outcomes above and beyond the actual level of each of the schemas. In
other words, latent profile analysis could prove to be an effective tool to
expand the study of situation-encoding schemas and to uncover any
hidden insights that might emerge as a result of considering unique
combinations of these schemas. As such, each schema is important by
itself, but latent profile analysis would allow researchers to study the
combined synergistic effect of multiple schemas together.

Conclusion

In 2012, Antonakis et al. argued that leadership and individual
difference research is at a cusp of a renaissance because of new theories
and methods to conceptualize and test more complete models of lea-
dership. We believe that the shift from the trait approach to the situa-
tion-trait approach, the identification of situation-encoding schemas as
foundational components of the leadership process, and the identifi-
cation and integration of specific situation encoding schemas is part of
this renaissance. Together, these contributions are meant to broaden,
deepen, and enhance the accuracy of our understanding for why leaders
do what they do, leading to important implications for leaders' self-
awareness, metacognition, effectiveness, and development.

References

Antonakis, J., Day, D. V., & Schyns, B. (2012). Leadership and individual differences: At
the cusp of a renaissance. The Leadership Quarterly, 23, 643–650.

Arazy, O., & Gellatly, I. R. (2012). Corporate wikis: The effects of owners’ motivation and
behavior on group members’ engagement. Journal of Management Information Systems,
29, 87–116.

Armor, D. A., & Taylor, S. E. (2003). The effects of mindset on behavior: Self-regulation in
deliberative and implemental frames of mind. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 29, 86–95.

Baldwin, M. (1992). Relational schemas and the processing of social information.
Psychological Bulletin, 112, 461–484.

Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Bargh, J. A. (1990). Goal intent: Goal-directed thought and behavior are often uninten-
tional. Psychological Inquiry, 1, 248–251.

Bargh, J. A. (1997). The automaticity of everyday life. In R. S. Wyer (Vol. Ed.), The
automaticity of everyday life: Advances in social cognition. Vol. 10. The automaticity of
everyday life: Advances in social cognition (pp. 1–61). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L. (1999). The unbearable automaticity of being. American
Psychologist, 54, 462–479.

Bargh, J. A., Gollwitzer, P. M., Lee-Chai, A., Barndollar, K., & Trötschel, R. (2001). The
automated will: Nonconscious activation and pursuit of behavioral goals. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 1014–1027.

Bass, B. M. (1990). Bass and Stogdill’s handbook of leadership: Theory, research, and man-
agerial applications. New York: Free Press.

Baumeister, R. F., Heatherton, T. F., & Tice, D. M. (1993). When ego threats lead to self-
regulation failure: Negative consequences of high self-esteem. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 64, 141–156.

Beal, D. J., & Weiss, H. M. (2003). Methods of ecological momentary assessment in or-
ganizational research. Organizational Research Methods, 6(4), 440–464.

Beer, J. S. (2002). Implicit self-theories of shyness. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 83, 1009–1024.

Blackwell, L. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit theories of in-
telligence predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study
and an intervention. Child Development, 78, 246–263.

Blume, B. D., Ford, K. J., Baldwin, T. T., & Huang, J. L. (2010). Transfer of training: A
meta-analytic review. Journal of Management, 36, 1065–1105.

Brandstätter, V., & Frank, E. (2002). Effects of deliberative and implemental mindsets on
persistence in goal-directed behavior. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28,
1366–1378.

Brockner, J., & Higgins, E. T. (2001). Regulatory focus theory: Implications for the study
of emotions at work. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 86, 35–66.

Burnette, J. L., O’Boyle, E. H., VanEpps, E. M., Pollack, J. M., & Finkel, E. J. (2013). Mind-
sets matter: A meta-analytic review of implicit theories and self-regulation.
Psychological Bulletin, 139, 655–701.

Button, S. B., Mathieu, J. E., & Zajac, D. M. (1996). Goal orientation in organizational
research: A conceptual and empirical foundation. Organizational Behavior & Human
Decision Processes, 67, 26–48.

Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (2002). Control processes and self-organization as com-
plementary principles underlying behavior. Personality and Social Psychology Review,
6, 304–315.

Cellar, D. F., Stuhlmacher, A. F., Young, S. K., Fisher, D. M., Adair, C. K., Haynes, S., ...
Riester, D. (2011). Trait goal orientation, self-regulation, and performance: A meta-
analysis. Journal of Business Psychology, 26, 467–483.

Cervone, D., Shadel, W. G., Smith, R. E., & Fiori, M. (2006). Self-regulation: Reminders
and suggestions from personality science. Applied Psychology: An International Review,
55, 333–385.

Chiu, C., Hong, Y., & Dweck, C. S. (1997). Lay dispositionism and implicit theories of
personality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 19–30.

Coad, A. F., & Berry, A. J. (1998). Transformational leadership and learning orientation.
Leadership & Organizational Development Journal, 19, 164–172.

Compas, B. E., Connor-Smith, J. K., Saltzman, H., Thomsen, A. H., & Wadsworth, M. E.
(2001). Coping with stress during childhood and adolescence: Problems, progress,
and potential in theory and research. Psychological Bulletin, 127, 87–127.

Cornwell, J. F., & Higgins, E. T. (2015). Approach and avoidance in moral psychology:
Evidence for three distinct motivational levels. Personality and Individual Differences,
86, 139–149.

Crocker, J., Luhtanen, R. K., Cooper, M. L., & Bouvrette, S. (2003). Contingencies of self-
worth in college students: Theory and measurement. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 85, 894–908.

Crum, A. J., & Langer, E. J. (2007). Mind-set matters: Exercise and the placebo effect.
Psychological Science, 18, 165–171.

Crum, A. J., Salovey, P., & Achor, S. (2013). Rethinking stress: The role of mindsets in
determining the stress response. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104,
716–733.

DeRue, D. S., Nahrgang, J. D., Wellman, N., & Humphrey, S. E. (2011). Trait and beha-
vioral theories of leadership: An integration and meta-analytic test of their relative
validity. Personnel Psychology, 64, 7–52.

DeShon, R. P., & Gillespie, J. Z. (2005). A motivated action theory account of goal or-
ientation. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90, 1096–1127.

Diefendorff, J. M., & Lord, R. G. (2008). Goal-striving and self-regulation processes. In R.
Kanfer, G. Chen, & R. D. Pritchard (Eds.). Work motivation: Past, present, and future
(pp. 151–197). New York, NY: Routledge.

Dierdorff, E. C., Surface, E. A., & Brown, K. G. (2010). Frame-of-reference training

R.K. Gottfredson and C.S. Reina The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101373

18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0165


effectiveness: Effects of goal orientation and self-efficacy on affective, cognitive, skill-
based, and transfer outcomes. Journal of Applied Psychology, 95, 1181–1191.

Dinh, J. E., Lord, R. G., & Hoffman, E. (2014). Leadership perception and information
processing: Influences of symbolic, connectionist, emotion, and embodied archi-
tectures. In D. V. Day (Ed.). The Oxford handbook of leadership and organizations (pp.
29–65). New York: Oxford University Press.

Doron, J., Stephan, Y., Boiché, J., & Le Scanff, C. (2009). Coping with examinations:
Exploring relationships between students’ coping strategies, implicit theories of
ability, and perceived control. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 79, 515–528.

Dragoni, L., Tesluk, P. E., Russell, J. E. A., & Oh, I.-S. (2009). Understanding managerial
development: Integrating developmental assignments, learning orientation, and ac-
cess to developmental opportunities in predicting managerial competencies. Academy
of Management Journal, 52, 731–743.

Dweck, C. S. (1986). Motivational processes affecting learning. American Psychologist, 41,
1040–1048.

Dweck, C. S. (2006). Mindset: The new psychology of success. New York, NY: Random
House.

Dweck, C. S. (2012). Implicit theories. In P. Van Lange, A. Kruglanski, & T. Higgins (Vol.
Eds.), The handbook of theories of social psychology. Vol. 2. The handbook of theories of
social psychology (pp. 43–61). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to motivation and
personality. Psychological Review, 95, 256–273.

Edwards, J. A., & Templeton, A. (2005). The structure of perceived qualities of situations.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 35, 705–723.

Elliot, A. J. (1999). Approach and avoidance motivation and achievement goals.
Educational Psychology, 34, 169–189.

Elliot, A. J., & McGregor, H. A. (2001). A 2 x 2 achievement goal framework. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 501–519.

Elliot, A. J. (1995). Approach and avoidance achievement goals: an intrinsic motivation
analysis. PhD thesisMadison: Univ.Wisc.

Epstein, S. (1994). Integration of the cognitive and the psychodynamic unconscious.
American Psychologist, 49, 709–724.

Erdley, C. A., & Dweck, C. S. (1993). Children’s implicit personality theories as predictors
of their social judgments. Child Development, 64, 863–878.

Fisher, S. L., & Ford, J. K. (1998). Differential effects of learner effort and goal orientation
on two learning outcomes. Personnel Psychology, 51, 397–420.

Flavell, J. H. (1979). Metacognition and metacognitive monitoring: A new area of cog-
nitive-developmental inquiry. American Psychologist, 34, 906–911.

Fleeson, W. (2007). Situation-based contingencies underlying trait-content manifestation
in behavior. Journal of Personality, 75, 825–862.

Fujita, K., Gollwitzer, P. M., & Oettingen, G. (2007). Mindsets and pre-conscious open-
mindedness to incidental information. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43,
48–61.

Gagne, F. M., & Lydon, J. E. (2001). Mindset and close relationships: When bias leads to
(in)accurate predictions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 85–96.

Gervey, B., Chiu, C., Hong, Y., & Dweck, C. S. (1999). Differential use of person in-
formation in decision-making about guilt vs. innocence: The role of implicit theories.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 17–27.

Gioia, D. A., & Poole, P. P. (1984). Scripts in organizational behavior. Academy of
Management Review, 9, 449–459.

Gollwitzer, P. M. (1990). Action phases and mind-sets. In E. T. Higgins, & R. M. Sorrentino
(Vol. Eds.), Handbook of motivation and cognition. Vol. 2. Handbook of motivation and
cognition (pp. 53–92). New York: Guilford.

Gollwitzer, P. M. (1993). Goal achievement: The role of intentions. European Review of
Social Psychology, 4, 141–185.

Gollwitzer, P. M. (2012). Mindset theory of action phases. In P. van Lange (Ed.).
Handbook of theories of social psychology (pp. 526–545). Thousand Oaks: Sage.

Gollwitzer, P. M., & Kinney, R. F. (1989). Effects of deliberative and implemental mind-
sets on the illusion of control. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56,
531–542.

Gorman, C. A., Meriac, J. P., Overstreet, B. L., Apodaca, S., McIntyre, A. L., Park, P., &
Godbey, J. N. (2012). A meta-analysis of the regulatory focus nomological network:
Work-related antecedents and consequences. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 90,
148–161.

Gregory, W. L., Cialdini, R. B., & Carpenter, K. M. (1982). Self-relevant scenarios as
mediators of likelihood estimates and compliance: Does imagining make it so?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 43, 89–99.

Hambrick, D. (2007). Upper echelon theory: Revisited. Academy of Management Review,
32, 1346–1352.

Hambrick, D. C., & Mason, P. A. (1984). Upper echelons: The organization as a reflection
of its top managers. Academy of Management Review, 9 (193-106).

Hannah, S. T., Woolfolk, R. L., & Lord, R. G. (2009). Leader self-structure: A framework
for positive leadership. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 30, 269–290.

Harmon-Jones, E., & Harmon-Jones, C. (2002). Testing the actionbased model of cogni-
tive dissonance: The effect of action orientation on postdecisional attitudes.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 711–723.

Heckhausen, H., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (1987). Thought contents and cognitive functioning
in motivational versus volitional stales of mind. Motivation and Emotion, 11, 101–120.

Hektner, J. M., Schmidt, J. A., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2007). Experience sampling method:
Measuring the quality of everyday life. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Henderson, M. D., de Liver, Y., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (2008). The effects of an implemental
mind-set on attitude strength. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94,
396–411.

Heslin, P. A., & Keating, L. A. (2017). In learning mode? The role of mindsets in derailing
and enabling experiential leadership development. Leadership Quarterly, 28, 367–384.

Heslin, P. A., Latham, G. P., & Vandewalle, D. (2005). The effect of implicit person theory

on performance appraisals. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90, 842–856.
Heslin, P. A., Vandewalle, D., & Latham, G. P. (2006). Keen to help? Managers’ implicit

person theories and their subsequent employee coaching. Personnel Psychology, 59,
871–902.

Higgins, E. T. (1990). Personality, social psychology, and person-situation relations:
Standards and knowledge activation as a common language. In L. A. Pervin (Ed.).
Handbook of personality: Theory and research (pp. 301–338). New York: Guilford Press.

Higgins, E. T. (1997). Beyond pleasure and pain. American Psychologist, 52, 1280–1300.
Higgins, E. T. (1998). Promotion and prevention: Regulatory focus as a motivational

principle. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 30, 1–45.
Higgins, E. T. (2000). Making a good decision: Value from fit. American Psychologist, 55,

1217–1230.
Higgins, E. T. (2001). Promotion and prevention experiences: Relating emotions to

nonemotional motivational states. In J. P. Forgas (Ed.). Handbook of affect and social
cognition (pp. 186–211). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Higgins, E. T., & Spiegel, S. (2004). Promotion and prevention strategies for self-regula-
tion: A motivated cognition perspective. In R. F. Baumeister, & K. D. Vohs (Eds.).
Handbook of self-regulation: Research, theory, and applications (pp. 171–187). New
York, NY: Guilford Press.

Hong, Y., Chiu, C., Dweck, C. S., Lin, D., & Wan, W. (1999). Implicit theories, attributions,
and coping: A meaning system approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
77, 588–599.

Hormuth, S. E. (1986). The sampling of experiences in situ. Journal of Personality, 54(1),
262–293.

Hoyt, C. L., Burnette, J. L., & Innella, A. N. (2012). I can do that: The impact of implicit
theories on leadership role model effectiveness. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 38, 257–268.

Janssen, O., & Van Yperen, N. W. (2004). Employees’ goal orientations, the quality of
leader–member exchange, and the outcomes of job performance and job satisfaction.
Academy of Management Journal, 47, 368–384.

Johnson, P. D., Smith, M. B., Wallace, J. C., Hill, A. D., & Baron, R. A. (2015). A review of
multilevel regulatory focus in organizations. Journal of Management, 41, 1501–1529.

Johnson, R. E., & Chang, C. (2008). Relationships between organizational commitment
and its antecedents: Employee self-concept matters. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 38, 513–541.

Johnson, R. E., Chang, C.-H. D., & Lord, R. G. (2006). Moving from cognition to behavior:
What the research says. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 381–415.

Judge, T. A., & Zapata, C. P. (2015). The person–situation debate revisited: Effect of
situation strength and trait activation on the validity of the Big Five personality traits
in predicting job performance. Academy of Management Journal, 58, 1149–1179.

Judge, T. A., Colbert, J. E., & Ilies, R. (2004). Intelligence and leadership: A quantitative
review and test of theoretical propositions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89,
542–552.

Kamins, M. L., & Dweck, C. S. (1999). Person versus process praise and criticism:
Implications for contingent self-worth and coping. Developmental Psychology, 35,
835–847.

Kammerlander, N., Burger, D., Fust, A., & Fueglistaller, U. (2015). Exploration and ex-
ploitation in established small and medium-sized enterprises: The effect of CEOs’
regulatory focus. Journal of Business Venturing, 30, 582–602.

Kark, R., & Van Dijk, D. V. (2007). Motivation to lead, motivation to follow: The role of
the self-regulatory focus in leadership processes. Academy of Management Review, 32,
500–528.

Kark, R., & Van Dijk, D. (2019). Keep your head in the clouds and your feet on the ground:
A multi-focal review of leadership–followership self-regulatory focus. Academy of
Management Annals, 13, 1–38.

Kark, R., Van Dijk, D. V., & Vashdi, D. R. (2018). Motivated or demotivated to be creative:
The role of self-regulatory focus in transformational and transactional leadership
processes. Applied Psychology, 67, 186–224.

Karoly, P. (1993). Mechanisms of self-regulation: A systems view. Annual Review of
Psychology, 44, 23–52.

Kihlstrom, J. F. (2004). Implicit methods in social psychology. In C. Sansone, C. C. Morf,
& A. Panter (Eds.). Handbook of methods in social psychology (pp. 195–212). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.

Kilduff, G. J., & Galinsky, A. D. (2013). From the ephemeral to the enduring: How ap-
proach-oriented mindsets lead to greater status. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 105, 816–831.

Kray, L. J., & Haselhuhn, M. P. (2007). Implicit negotiation beliefs and performance:
Experimental and longitudinal evidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
93, 49–64.

Lanaj, K., Chang, C.-H. D., & Johnson, R. E. (2012). Regulatory focus and work-related
outcomes: A review and meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 138, 998–1034.

Levy, S. R., Stroessner, S. J., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Stereotype formation and endorse-
ment: The role of implicit theories. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74,
1421–1436.

Linville, P. W., & Clark, L. F. (1989). Can production systems cope with coping? Social
Cognition, 7, 195–236.

Lord, R., Diefendorff, J., Schmidt, A., & Hall, R. (2010). Self-regulation at work. Annual
Review of Psychology, 61, 543–568.

Mangels, J. A., Butterfield, B., Lamb, J., Good, C. D., & Dweck, C. S. (2006). Why do
beliefs about intelligence influence learning success? A social cognitive neuroscience
model. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience (SCAN), 1, 75–86.

Marsh, H. W., Lüdtke, O., Trautwein, U., & Morin, A. (2009). Classical latent profile
analysis of academic self-concept dimensions: Synergy of person- and variable-cen-
tered approaches to theoretical models of self-concept. Structural Equation Modeling,
16, 191–225.

Matzler, K., & Mueller, J. (2011). Antecedents of knowledge sharing-examining the

R.K. Gottfredson and C.S. Reina The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101373

19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf201912181126378795
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf201912181126378795
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf201912181254373884
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf201912181254373884
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf201912181118234657
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf201912181118234657
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf2803
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf2803
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf201912181121233199
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf201912181121233199
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf201912181121233199
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf201912181047507091
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf201912181047507091
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf201912181047507091
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf201912181124104954
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf201912181124104954
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0490


influence of learning and performance orientation. Journal of Economics Psychology,
32, 317–329.

Michel, J. S., & LeBreton, J. M. (2011). Leadership coherence: An application of per-
sonality coherence theory to the study of leadership. Personality and Individual
Differences, 50, 688–694.

Miele, D. B., & Molden, D. C. (2010). Naive theories of intelligence and the role of pro-
cessing fluency in perceived comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 139, 535–557.

Miller, E., & Cohen, J. (2001). An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function. Annual
Review of Neuroscience, 24, 167–202.

Miller, G. F. (2007). Reconciling evolutionary psychology and ecological psychology:
How to perceive fitness affordances. Acta Psychologica Sinica, 39, 546–555.

Mischel & Shoda, 1998.
Mischel, W. (2009). From personality and assessment (1968) to personality science, 2009.

Journal of Research in Personality, 43, 282–290.
Mischel, W., & Shoda, Y. (1994). Personality psychology has two goals: Must it be two

fields? Psychological Inquiry, 5, 156–158.
Mischel, W., & Shoda, Y. (1995). A cognitive-affective system theory of personality:

Reconceptualizing situations, dispositions, dynamics, and invariance in personality
structure. Psychological Review, 102, 246–268.

Mischel, W., & Shoda, Y. (2008). Toward a unified theory of personality: Integrating
dispositions and processing dynamics within the cognitive-affective processing
system. In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.). Handbook of personality:
Theory and research (pp. 208–241). (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Molden, D. C., & Dweck, C. S. (2006). Finding “meaning” in psychology: A lay theories
approach to self-regulation, social perception, and social development. American
Psychologist, 61, 192–203.

Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for intelligence can undermine children’s
motivation and performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 33–52.

Muthén, B. O., & Muthén, L. K. (2000). Integrating person-centered and variable-centered
analysis: Growth mixture modeling with latent trajectory classes. Alcoholism: Clinical
and Experimental Research, 24, 882–891.

Nadkarni, S., & Herrmann, P. (2010). CEO personality, strategic flexibility, and firm
performance: The case of the Indian business process outsourcing industry. Academy
of Management Journal, 53, 1050–1073.

Nadkarni, S., & Narayanan, V. K. (2007). Strategic schemas, strategic flexibility, and firm
performance: The moderating role of industry clockspeed. Strategic Management
Journal, 28, 243–270.

Nicholls, J. G. (1975). Causal attributions and other achievement-related cognitions:
Effects of task outcome, attainment value, and sex. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 31, 379–389.

Nussbaum, A. D., & Dweck, C. S. (2008). Defensiveness versus remediation: Self-theories
and modes of self-esteem maintenance. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34,
500–612.

Ott, B. (2017, Oct. 12). 3 reasons why performance development wins in the workplace.
Retrieved from: https://www.gallup.com/workplace/231620/why-performance-
development-wins-workplace.aspx.

Park, K. W., Arvey, R. D., & Tong, Y. K. (2011). The generalizability of leadership across
activity domains and time periods. Leadership Quarterly, 22, 223–237.

Payne, S. C., Youngcourt, S. S., & Beaubien, J. M. (2007). A meta-analytic examination of
the goal orientation nomological net. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92, 128–150.

Pervin, L., & John, O. P. (1999). Handbook of personality: Theory and research (2nd ed.).
New York: Guilford.

Peterson, R. S., Smith, D. B., Martorana, P. V., & Owens, P. D. (2003). The impact of chief
executive officer personality on top management team dynamics. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 88, 795–808.

Plaks, J. E., Stroessner, S. J., Dweck, C. S., & Sherman, J. W. (2001). Person theories and
attention allocation: Preferences for stereotypic versus counterstereotypic informa-
tion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 876–893.

Plato, & Jowett, B. (1901). The republic of Plato; an ideal commonwealth (Rev. ed.). New
York: The Colonial Press.

Poortvliet, P. M., & Giebels, E. (2012). Self-improvement and cooperation: How exchange
relationships promote mastery-approach driven individuals’ job outcomes. European
Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 21, 392–425.

Poortvliet, P. M., Janssen, O., Van Yperen, N. W., & Van de Vliert, E. (2007). Achievement
goals and interpersonal behavior: How mastery and performance goals shape in-
formation exchange. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 33, 1435–1447.

Puca, R. M. (2001). Preferred difficulty and subject probability in different action phases.
Motivation and Emotion, 25, 307–326.

Rauthmann, J. F., Gallardo-Pujol, D., Guillaume, E. M., Todd, E., Nave, C. S., Sherman, R.
A., & Funder, D. C. (2014). The situational eight DIAMONDS: A taxonomy of major
dimensions of situational characteristics. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,

107, 677–718.
Rauthmann, J. F., Sheran, R. A., & Funder, D. C. (2015). Principles of situation research:

Towards a better understanding of psychological situations. European Journal of
Personality, 29, 262–281.

Resick, C. J., Whitman, D. S., Weingarden, S. M., & Hiller, N. J. (2009). The bright-side
and the dark-side of CEO personality: Examining core self-evaluations, narcissism,
transformational leadership, and strategic influence. Journal of Applied Psychology,
94, 1365–1381.

Riddle, D. (2016). Executive integration: Equipping transitioning leaders for success.
Retrieved from https://www.ccl.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/
ExecutiveIntegration.pdf.

Scholer, A. A., & Higgins, E. T. (2010). Regulatory focus in a demanding world. In R. H.
Hoyle (Ed.). Handbook of personality and self-regulation (pp. 291–314). Malden, MA:
Blackwell.

Shah, J., Higgins, E. T., & Friedman, R. S. (1998). Performance incentives and means:
How regulatory focus influences goal attainment. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 74, 285–293.

Shih, S. S. (2009). An examination of factors related to Taiwanese adolescents’ reports of
avoidance strategies. Journal of Educational Research, 102, 377–388.

Simons, J., Dewitte, S., & Lens, W. (2004). The role of different types of instrumentality in
motivation, study strategies, and performance: Know why you learn, so you’ll know
what you learn!. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 74, 343–360.

Smith, E. R., & DeCoster, J. (2000). Dual process models in social and cognitive psy-
chology: Conceptual integration and links to underlying memory systems. Personality
and Social Psychology Review, 4, 108–131.

Sosik, J. J., Godshalk, V. M., & Yammarino, F. J. (2004). Transformational leadership,
learning goal orientation, and expectations for career success in mentor–protégé re-
lationships: A multiple levels of analysis perspective. Leadership Quarterly, 15,
241–261.

Spanjol, J., Tam, L., Qualls, W. J., & Bohlmann, J. D. (2011). New product team decision
making: Regulatory focus effects on number, type, and timing decisions. Journal of
Product Innovation Management, 28, 623–640.

Spielberg, J. M., Heller, W., & Miller, G. A. (2013). Hierarchical brain networks active in
approach and avoidance goal pursuit. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 284.

Spielberger, C., & Vagg, P. (1995). Test anxiety: A transactional process model. In C.
Spielberger, & P. Vagg (Eds.). Test anxiety: Theory, assessment, and treatment (pp. 3–
14). Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis.

Tabernero, C., & Wood, R. E. (1999). Implicit theories versus the social construal of ability
in self-regulation and performance on a complex task. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 78, 104–127.

Taylor, S. E., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (1995). Effects of mindset on positive illusions. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 213–226.

Taylor-Bianco, A., & Schermerhorn, J., Jr. (2006). Self-regulation, strategic leadership
and paradox in organizational change. Journal of Organizational Change Management,
19, 457–470.

Tziner, A., Fisher, M., Senior, T., & Weisberg, J. (2007). Effects of trainee characteristics
on training effectiveness. International Journal of Selection and Assessment, 15,
167–174.

Van Yperen, N. W., Blaga, M., & Postmes, T. (2014). A meta-analysis of self-reported
achievement goals and nonself-report performance across three achievement do-
mains (work, sports, and education). PLoS One, 9, 1–16.

Van Yperen, N. W., Hamstra, M. R. W., & Van der Klauw, M. (2011). To win, or not to
lose, at any cost: The impact of achievement goals on cheating. British Journal of
Management, 22, S5–S15.

Vandewalle, D., Nerstad, C. G. L., & Dysvik, A. (2019). Goal orientation: A review of the
miles traveled and the miles to go. Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and
Organizational Behavior, 6, 115–144.

Waldman, D. A., & Yammarino, F. J. (1999). CEO charismatic leadership: Levels-of-
management and levels-of analysis effects. Academy of Management Review, 24,
266–285.

Wallace, J. C., Little, L. M., Hill, A. D., & Ridge, J. W. (2010). CEO regulatory foci, en-
vironmental dynamism, and small firm performance. Journal of Small Business
Management, 48, 580–604.

Wilson, T. (2004). Strangers to ourselves: Discovering the adaptive unconscious. Cambridge:
Belknap Press.

Yeager, D. S., Hanselman, P., Walton, G. M., Murray, J. S., Crosnoe, R., Muller, C., ...
Dweck, C. S. (2019). A national experiment reveals where a growth mindset improves
achievement. Nature. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1466-y Available from.

Zaccaro, S. J., Green, J. P., Dubrow, S., & Kolze, M. (2018). Leader individual differences,
situational parameters, and leadership outcomes: A comprehensive review and in-
tegration. The Leadership Quarterly, 29, 2–43.

R.K. Gottfredson and C.S. Reina The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101373

20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0545
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0545
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0545
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf2552
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf2552
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf2552
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0560
https://www.gallup.com/workplace/231620/why-performance-development-wins-workplace.aspx
https://www.gallup.com/workplace/231620/why-performance-development-wins-workplace.aspx
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0570
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0570
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0575
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0575
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0580
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0580
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0595
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0595
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0600
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0600
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0600
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0605
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0605
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0605
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0610
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0610
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0615
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0615
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0615
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0615
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0620
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0620
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0620
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0625
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0625
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0625
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0625
https://www.ccl.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/ExecutiveIntegration.pdf
https://www.ccl.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/ExecutiveIntegration.pdf
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0635
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0635
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0635
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0640
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0640
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0640
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0650
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0650
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0655
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0655
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0655
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0660
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0660
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0660
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0665
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0665
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0665
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0665
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0670
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0670
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0670
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0675
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0675
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0680
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0680
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0680
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0685
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0685
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0685
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0690
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0690
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0695
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0695
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0695
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0700
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0700
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0700
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0705
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0705
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0705
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0710
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0710
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0710
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0715
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0715
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0715
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0720
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0720
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0720
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0725
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0725
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0725
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0730
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0730
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1466-y
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0740
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0740
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30838-5/rf0740


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

The Leadership Quarterly

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua

Review

Follower transformation as the linchpin of transformational leadership
theory: A systematic review and future research agenda☆

Nathapon Siangchokyoo⁎, Ryan L. Klinger, Emily D. Campion
Strome College of Business, Department of Management, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 23529, United States

A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords:
Transformational leadership
Follower transformation
Systematic review
Longitudinal research
Multifactor leadership questionnaire

A B S T R A C T

Transformational leadership theory represents a cornerstone in leadership research. Despite an impressive
empirical record highlighted by both the breadth of its nomological network and magnitudes of effects, scholars
raise serious construct and content validity concerns. In this article, we address a remarkable oversight in the
transformational leadership literature. Few studies have assessed the theory assumption that the positive in-
dividual, group, and organizational effects of transformational leadership are due to the transformation of fol-
lowers in specific and enduring ways. We offer a systematic review of empirical evidence related to follower
transformation as the conceptual foundation of transformational leadership theory. Findings from this review
highlight the radical leap in the evolution of transformational leadership theory from nascent phenomena to
mature paradigm. Calling for a return to nascent and intermediary phases of theory development, we conclude
with a research agenda aimed at creating a stronger theory, better measures, and more actionable leadership
models.

Introduction

Transformational leadership theory has garnered substantial scho-
larly attention since its inception more than 40 years ago and continues
to be one of the most actively researched leadership paradigms (Day &
Antonakis, 2012; Dinh et al., 2014; Northouse, 2016). The notion that
leaders transform followers in ways that lead to greater organizational
performance provides a compelling conceptual foundation for both
research and practice. Hundreds of empirical studies support links be-
tween transformational leaders and individual, group, and organiza-
tional outcomes, making it hard to deny the importance of this con-
struct.

Yet despite its rich history, transformational leadership theory is at
a crossroads. On the one hand, critics point out serious flaws in the
theory and operationalizations, with some going so far as to call for the
abandonment of the construct entirely (most notably, van Knippenberg
& Sitkin, 2013). On the other, researchers continue to invest efforts to
explore new frontiers of this leadership paradigm (cf. Jiang & Chen,
2018; Jin, Seo, & Shapiro, 2016; Rosen et al., 2019). The purpose of this
review is to explore potential explanations for how the current state of
affairs came to be and offer a much-needed course correction to the
transformational leadership research agenda.

Our review centers on the notion that follower transformation

represents the key conceptual foundation for transformational leader-
ship theory. Regardless of the positive outcomes associated with this
leadership construct, a leader isn't truly “transformational” unless fol-
lowers are transformed. Moreover, the utility of transformational lea-
dership hinges on follower transformation serving as a mechanism ex-
plaining the relationship between leaders and positive organizational
outcomes. Reviewing the role of follower transformation in transfor-
mational leadership scholarship, we note its similarity to a linchpin: a
critical and often undervalued fastener that holds a complex mechan-
ical system together and whose absence or failure would cause an entire
system to malfunction. In engineering parlance, it is critical to test the
durability of linchpins early in the design process. We therefore ask:
Have researchers sufficiently tested the major linchpins of transformational
leadership theory?

In the section below, we review transformational leadership theory
examining existing criticisms and explicating three fundamental as-
sumptions related to the role of follower transformation. Next, we
conduct a systematic literature review to explore whether the field has
adequately investigated these assumptions. Finding insufficient evi-
dence, we draw on Edmondson and McManus's (2007) theory-building
framework to expose a radical leap in the transformational leadership
literature as the field prematurely advanced from a nascent to mature
stage of theory development.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101341
Received 16 November 2018; Received in revised form 24 August 2019; Accepted 21 October 2019

☆ This proposal did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
⁎ Corresponding author at: 2036 Constant Hall, Strome College of Business, Department of Management, Norfolk, VA 23529, United States.
E-mail address: nsiangch@odu.edu (N. Siangchokyoo).

The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101341

Available online 12 November 2019
1048-9843/ © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

T

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/10489843
https://www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101341
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101341
mailto:nsiangch@odu.edu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101341
http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101341&domain=pdf


We conclude with an assessment of the implications of our findings.
Combining our concerns with other critiques of transformational lea-
dership theory, we propose a moratorium on theory-extending em-
pirical research until scholars address a series of difficult-yet-necessary
questions relating to the future of this construct. Finally, taking the
stance that (a) transformational leadership theory is not dead but will
require considerable efforts to revive and (b) there are enough re-
deeming qualities of this theory to justify a revival, we offer a future
research agenda aimed at paving the way for a richer theory, more valid
measures, and more actionable theoretical and practical applications of
transformational leadership.

An overview of the state of transformational leadership theory

Forty years after James McGregor Burns introduced the concept of
the transforming leader, his ideas continue to have a substantial impact
on how we think about and apply leadership theory. Simply stated,
Burns' (1978) thesis was that great leaders are transformational in that
they “serve as an independent force in changing the makeup of the fol-
lowers' motive base…” (Burns, 1978, p. 20, emphasis in original). In the
decades that followed, leadership scholars sought to refine, expand, and
empirically validate a theory of transformational leadership into what
has become arguably the most widely researched leadership paradigm
(Day & Antonakis, 2012; Dinh et al., 2014; Northouse, 2016). Most
notable to the evolution of transformational leadership theory was the
work of Bernard Bass and colleagues who helped clarify (a) the beha-
viors that leaders engage in to induce follower transformation; (b) the
ways in which leaders transform followers; and (c) the nexus of out-
comes influenced by leader-follower interactions (Avolio & Bass, 1995;
Bass, 1985; Bass & Riggio, 2006; Bass & Steidlmeier, 1999).

Empirical evidence of the predictive validity of transformational
leadership has been most impressive. Hundreds of primary studies and
dozens of meta-analyses have consistently produced moderate-to-strong
relationships between transformational leadership and outcomes such
as performance, engagement, satisfaction, commitment, and turnover
(e.g., DeRue, Nahrgang, Wellman, & Humphrey, 2011; Judge & Piccolo,
2004; Lowe, Kroeck, & Sivasubramaniam, 1996; G. Wang, Oh,
Courtright, & Colbert, 2011). Comparisons to leadership approaches
including authentic leadership, ethical leadership, servant leadership,
and transactional leadership highlight both strong relative predictive
validity and incremental validity of transformational leadership over
and above other leadership constructs (Hoch, Bommer, Dulebohn, &
Wu, 2016; Judge & Piccolo, 2004; G. Wang et al., 2011).

Despite an impressive empirical record highlighted by both the
breadth of its nomological network and magnitudes of effects, trans-
formational leadership theory is not without its critics. For instance,
van Knippenberg and Sitkin (2013) liken transformational leadership to
the Hans Christian Anderson tale of The Emperor's New Clothes where a
community is blinded by what they expect to see (that transformational
leadership is a viable construct) despite clear evidence to the contrary.
They identify four blemishes marring transformational leadership
scholarship: (1) the lack of a clear conceptual definition leading to
ambiguities regarding the dimensionality of the transformational leader
construct; (2) no clear understanding of the causal relationships be-
tween leader behaviors, follower responses, and performance out-
comes; (3) operationalizations of transformational leaders that con-
found leader behaviors with effects; and (4) transformational leader
measures that fail to reproduce the dimensional structure of the the-
ories. The authors go as far as to label these issues as “fatal flaws” that
are “fundamental and inherent” and call for “abandoning the construct”
of transformational leadership entirely (van Knippenberg & Sitkin,
2013, p. 2).

Indeed, several scholars have echoed the concerns raised by van
Knippenberg and Sitkin (e.g., Barnes, Guarana, Nauman, & Kong, 2016;
C. Li, Zhao, & Begley, 2015; V. Li, Mitchell, & Boyle, 2015; Mitchell
et al., 2014), and while few have gone so far as to argue for abandoning

the construct entirely, it is clear that we do a disservice to the field by
discussing the concerns in principle, but ignoring them in practice. Our
goal in this review is to go beyond simply raising awareness of issues
with transformational leadership theory (for this, see Antonakis,
Bastardoz, Jacquart, & Shamir, 2016; Behrendt, Matz, & Göritz, 2017;
van Knippenberg & Sitkin, 2013) to clarify how these issues have per-
vaded the literature despite so much scholarship.

We present an epistemological assessment of transformational lea-
dership theory based on a systematic review of the empirical literature.
Our assessment leads to three major conclusions: First, the field has
reached what Pfeffer (1993) refers to as high paradigm development,
which is characterized by consensually shared beliefs about the nature
of a theory and the appropriateness of methods of measurement and
empirical validation. Pfeffer and others make the argument that para-
digm consensus is a necessary—although not sufficient—condition for
the systematic advancement of knowledge; fields with undeveloped
paradigms are hampered by construct proliferation that obfuscates
communication of new knowledge and makes comparing and accu-
mulating findings problematic (Cole, 1983; Kuhn, 1970). As Webster
and Starbuck (1988) note: the scientific value of consensus hinges on
the correctness of the paradigm and consensus of a mis-specified
paradigm could be more damaging than a lack of consensus as the
former may result in the advancement of erroneous scientific claims.

A second insight from our literature review is that the field has been
in what Edmondson and McManus (2007) refer to as a mature stage of
theory development. This stage is characterized by “elegant, complex,
and logically rigorous [research], addressing issues that other re-
searchers would agree from the outset are worthy of study” (p. 1159).
Importantly, Edmondson and McManus note that once a field reaches
the mature stage of theory development, researchers typically rely
heavily on existing constructs and measures and aim to contribute to
the theory by adding specificity, introducing new mechanisms, or ex-
ploring boundary conditions. Related to the above concern regarding
the relationship between paradigm consensus and correctness, a fun-
damental assumption of mature-stage theories is that the field suc-
cessfully traversed through earlier developmental stages whereby (a)
new theories are generated and explicated (nascent stage) and (b) pro-
visional empirical support is found for major theoretical propositions
and assumptions (intermediate stage). Our literature review exposes a
radical leap of transformational leadership scholarship where the field
prematurely advanced from a nascent to mature stage of development
with paradigm consensus occurring before scholars exercised due dili-
gence examining the major assumptions of transformational leadership
theory.

Our third major conclusion is that there is a relative dearth of em-
pirically rigorous research validating the claims that (a) transforma-
tional leaders transform followers in relatively enduring and specific
ways and that (b) follower transformation explains the positive effects
of leaders on organizational outcomes. Recognizing this oversight and
its implications, we call for a program of research that takes transfor-
mational leadership theory back to previous stages (intermediate,
nascent) where theoretical assumptions are validated and unsupported
assumptions are examined and refined.

Transformational leaders and transformational leadership

Before reviewing the transformational leadership literature, a clar-
ification on the distinction between the concept of transformational
leaders and that of transformational leadership is necessary. Following
the recommendations of Day and colleagues (Day, 2000, 2011; Day,
Fleenor, Atwater, Sturm, & McKee, 2014), we recognize the importance
of making a conceptual distinction between the intrapersonal study of
leaders and the interpersonal study of leadership. We extend this ob-
servation to transformational leadership theory where we attempt to
disentangle what we know about transformational leaders (i.e., the at-
tributes and behaviors associated with people who fit this

N. Siangchokyoo, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101341

2



categorization) from what we know about transformational leadership
(i.e., the process though which leaders transform followers).1

While scholars have created parallel models and alternate measures
of transformational leaders (see Bass & Avolio, 1995; Conger &
Kanungo, 1994; Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Moorman, & Fetter, 1990;
Rafferty & Griffin, 2004; Shamir, Zakay, Breinin, & Popper, 1998),
previous reviews of the literature highlight the considerable conceptual
and empirical overlap (Bass & Riggio, 2006; Ng, 2017; van Knippenberg
& Sitkin, 2013). For the sake of brevity, we refer to the Bass and Avolio
(1995) dimensional labels of transformational leaders unless otherwise
noted as they are the most recognizable and are frequently synony-
mized with transformational leaders. According to this model, the ex-
tent to which leaders are considered transformational is a function of
four leader dimensions: (1) Idealized influence (role modeling attributes
and behaviors); (2) Inspirational motivation (articulations of compelling
and inspiring visions of the future); (3) Intellectual stimulation (chal-
lenging existing assumptions and stimulating new ways of thinking);
and (4) Individualized consideration (attending to followers' needs and
concerns).

While much of the scholarship in this area focuses on studying the
impact of transformational leaders' attributes and behaviors on work
outcomes, original conceptualizations of the theory emphasize a pro-
cess-oriented, leadership-oriented focus. In one of his earliest works on
conceptualizing transformational leadership theory, Bass proposed
transformational leadership as the process through which leaders
“broaden and elevate the interests of their employees,…generate
awareness and acceptance of the purposes and mission of the group,
and…stir their employees to look beyond their own self-interests for the
good of the group” (Bass, 1990, p. 21).

The stipulation that follower transformation is at the core of
transformational leadership was further explicated by subsequent
scholars. Podsakoff et al. (1990), for instance, in describing early at-
tempts to define transformational leadership (e.g., Avolio & Bass, 1988;
Bass, 1985; Bass, Avolio, & Goodheim, 1987; Bass, Waldman, Avolio, &
Bebb, 1987; Conger & Kanungo, 1987; House, Woycke, & Fodor, 1988),
argued that a common theme among these early perspectives is that
“[transformational] leaders transform or change the basic values, be-
liefs, and attitudes of followers so that they are willing to perform be-
yond the minimum levels specified by the organizations” (p. 108). As
more recent scholars noted, the essence of transformational leadership
theory is a process whereby the leader builds followers' commitment to
organizational objectives and develops followers to be able to accom-
plish organizational goals (Avolio & Yammarino, 2013; Bass & Riggio,
2006; van Dierendonck, Stam, Boersma, de Windt, & Alkema, 2014;
Yukl, 1998). Put simply, transformational leaders influence the devel-
opment and transformation of their followers. The result, at least in
theory, is the enhancement of follower performance, and subsequently,
organizational performance, beyond expectations (Bass, 1985; Yukl,
1998).

Follower transformation as the linchpin of transformational
leadership theory

Despite so much scholarship of transformational leadership to date,
the transformation of followers remains one of the most critical and
understudied elements of this leadership paradigm. This oversight is
unfortunate given Burns' assertion that “the extent of real change in
[followers] must be investigated, not assumed.” (Burns, 1978, p. 440,
emphasis in original). Emphasizing the process-oriented focus of
transformational leadership, our review centers on the notion that
follower transformation represents an indispensable conceptual foun-
dation of transformational leadership theory. Given the relative mileage
of transformational leadership research, we propose that a critical
evaluation of this linchpin is long overdue.

Drawing on Bass's (1985; see also Bass & Riggio, 2006) con-
ceptualization of transformational leadership, we focus on follower
transformation and identify three underlying assumptions of transfor-
mational leadership theory:

1) Leaders are responsible for relatively enduring change (i.e., trans-
formation) in followers.

2) Followers are transformed in specific ways.
3) The systematic, relatively enduring change in followers explains the

process through which leaders achieve positive workplace results.

In the sections below, we discuss each assumption and describe
examples of evidence that would provide support. Then, we system-
atically review the literature to determine whether the field has gar-
nered support for the underlying assumptions of transformational lea-
dership.

Assumption 1. Leaders transform followers.

Transformational leadership theory is grounded in the assumption
that followers transform as the result of their experience with certain
leaders. Burns (1978) describes the qualities of transformation as in-
volving “real change” in terms of (a) the magnitude of change: fol-
lowers' attitudes and values need be transformed to a “marked degree”;
and (b) persistence of change: change should be relatively enduring
rather than fleeting. While this assumption is perhaps the simplest and
most intuitive of the three, the difficulty comes in testing this as-
sumption since it requires that researchers utilize study designs pow-
erful enough to model change. This involves both complex analytical
research methodologies and repeated measurement of variables that are
expected to change—and remain changed—over time (Ployhart &
Vandenberg, 2010; Singer & Willett, 2003). In this regard, our test of
the first assumption involves identifying whether transformational
leadership research has employed research designs suitable for asses-
sing follower transformation.

Assumption 2. Followers transform in specific ways.

A second fundamental assumption of transformational leadership
theory is that transformational leaders stimulate particular transfor-
mations in followers. As a historian and political scientist, James Burns'
original conceptualization of transformational leadership laid the
groundwork for how societal transformations might occur. Subsequent
work by Bass and colleagues applied transformational leadership to
organizational contexts and specified how employees are transformed.
In particular, Bass (1985) described three specific aspects of a follower's
self-concept that are impacted by transformational leaders (for detailed
discussions, see Bass, 1985; Bass & Riggio, 2006; Shamir, House, &
Arthur, 1993; van Knippenberg & Sitkin, 2013):

1. Collective identification: Followers develop a sense of belonging to the
team or organization and see the collective as an important part of
their personal identity.

2. Value internalization: Followers align their personal values with the

1 In van Knippenberg and Sitkin's (2013) critique of transformational lea-
dership, the authors argue that disentangling the process of transformational
leadership from the way in which transformational leaders are evaluated is
difficult due to the dominance of the MLQ in transformational leadership re-
search, stating, “transformational leadership is de facto defined as what the
MLQ measures.” (p. 5; emphasis in original). From this position, they provide a
critique of transformational leadership that largely hinges on issues with con-
ceptualizing and operationalizing transformational leader attributes and be-
haviors (through the MLQ). While we recognize the seriousness of the authors'
major criticisms, we take the perspective that disentangling the concept of
transformational leaders from transformational leadership theory is (a) pos-
sible, (b) necessary due to what van Knippenberg identify as “fundamental
flaws” in the transformational leader paradigm, and (c) useful in guiding so-
lutions to overcoming these concerns. We return to this issue in the Discussion
section.

N. Siangchokyoo, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101341

3



values of the team or organization.
3. Self-efficacy: Followers develop a heightened sense of their ability

and potential to accomplish their task.

To test this assumption, we explore whether research has in-
vestigated the link between transformational leaders and these three
specific constructs. It should be noted that several additional mediating
mechanisms have been proposed and empirically investigated by lea-
dership scholars. We do not intend to devalue the important work that
has been done to extend transformational leadership theory beyond its
original form. Rather, our aim is to explore what has not been done, in
terms of empirically validating the foundational assumptions of this
theory upon which paradigm consensus and subsequent theory-ex-
tending research is grounded.2

Assumption 3. Followers transformation is responsible for the
effectiveness of transformational leadership.

Transformational leadership theory was designed to explain var-
iance in leadership effectiveness. Whereas the previous two evaluations
focus on validating the claim that transformational leaders create sys-
tematic and enduring changes in followers, the final assessment ex-
plores the extent to which the field has adequately tested whether these
systematic, enduring follower transformations account for the benefits
associated with transformational leaders. In other words, a key in-
dicator of the effectiveness of transformational leadership would be
evidence that the transformation of followers represents the process
through which transformational leaders influence positive individual,
group, and organizational outcomes. In sum, the veracity and utility of
transformational leadership scholarship hinges on a few critical as-
sumptions. In the next section, we explore three features of the litera-
ture:

1. Choices related to research design: Has the field employed appro-
priate research designs to capture enduring follower transforma-
tions?

2. Choices related to study variables: Has the field explored systematic
follower change according to theory propositions (collective iden-
tification, value internalization, and self-efficacy)?

3. Choices related to data analysis: Has the field captured systematic,
enduring follower transformations analyzed whether these trans-
formations account for the effectiveness of transformational lea-
ders?

To be clear, we do not intend to appraise individual scholars'
choices or imply that investigations that do not test these assumptions
are necessarily inferior. We assess the collective choices of the field to
examine the (in)stability of the foundation upon which paradigm con-
sensus and mature-stage, theory-extending research rests.

Method

A systematic literature search was conducted to identify relevant
studies for inclusion in our review. Using “transformational leadership”
as the keyword, we followed Fischer, Dietz, and Antonakis (2017)
screening criteria by searching online databases (ABI INFORM Global,

Academic Search Complete and Business Source Complete via the
EBSCOhost research databases, PsycINFO, and Web of Science) for ar-
ticles that were published before February 2019 in twenty-five journals
known to publish leadership research (see Table 1 for a complete list of
journals in this review). While we could have limited our search only to
studies published since 1985 (when Bass published his seminal book on
transformational leadership), we did not want to exclude studies that
may have also investigated earlier conceptualizations of the trans-
forming leader (e.g., Burns, 1978). The initial screening yielded 1536
articles.

We then vetted full texts to confirm the relevance of each study. We
applied three inclusion criteria during this screening process. First, the
study had to be empirical and original research with transformational
leadership being one of the focal studied variables (eliminating meta-
analyses, reviews, and conceptual studies). Second, since the dimen-
sions of transformational leadership are thought to be formative rather
than reflective indicators (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Podsakoff, & Lee,
2003) where the “whole” is conceptually different from any subset of
“parts”, we excluded studies that only captured a partial set of trans-
formational leadership dimensions. For instance, a study by Koseoglu,
Liu, and Shalley (2017) was excluded because only intellectual stimu-
lation was measured. We also excluded studies that examined trans-
formational leadership as a context (e.g., transformational leadership
climate) as they did not measure the direct effects of transformational
leaders (e.g., Jiang, Jackson, & Colakoglu, 2016; Menges, Walter,
Vogel, & Bruch, 2011).

Applying these criteria, we identified 320 primary studies reporting
empirical tests of transformational leadership. Since the focus of our
analysis is on follower transformation, we coded studies wherein a
follower psychological transformation was directly measured. This ex-
cluded studies that measured transformational leader's direct influence
on organizational outcomes (e.g., Vaccaro, Jansen, Van Den Bosch, &
Volberda, 2012; Zhu, Chew, & Spangler, 2005), studies that only ex-
amined antecedents of the leader's attributes and behaviors (e.g.,
Bommer, Rubin, & Baldwin, 2004; Reichard et al., 2011), studies that
used transformational leadership as an element of the nomological
network of other variables (e.g., Hu, Erdogan, Jiang, Bauer, & Liu,
2018; G. Li, Rubenstein, Lin, Wang, & Chen, 2018), and scale validation
studies (e.g., Antonakis, Avolio, & Sivasubramaniam, 2003;
Schriesheim, Wu, & Scandura, 2009).

We should also note that while the transformational leadership lit-
erature has been largely dominated by Bass's Full Range Leadership
Model and the use of the Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire (MLQ;
Bass & Avolio, 1995; Antonakis & House, 2013; van Knippenberg &
Sitkin, 2013), we included studies that relied on other transformational
leadership measures and models (e.g., Podsakoff et al., 1990; Rafferty &
Griffin, 2004) to ensure we provided a complete representation of the
state of transformational leadership research. Applying these criteria,
we reduced our sample by 185, yielding a final sample of 135 relevant
articles. In the next section, we discuss our approach for categorizing
studies on follower transformation based on the three assumptions of
transformational leadership theory.

Categorization

In Table 2, we present our categorization of the articles in this re-
view. Note that the number of articles in the far-right column (n=185)
constitutes studies that did not meet our inclusion criteria of assessing
follower transformation. We present this number to provide a more
complete illustration of the transformational leadership research and to
demonstrate the proportion of empirical research on follower trans-
formation to the overall transformational leadership literature.

In order to more effectively and systematically evaluate the trans-
formational leadership literature according to the three assumptions of
transformational leadership theory, we categorized the articles in the
following way. First, to address the first assumption, we focused on

2 A post hoc assessment of our article database revealed that 90.4% of the
empirical studies in our review cited at least one of the works that developed
the three psychological mechanisms as key mediators in the transformational
leadership process (Bass, 1985; Bass, 1998; Bass & Riggio, 2006; Shamir et al.,
1993). Moreover, several studies explicitly identified these mechanisms as the
unmeasured phenomena explaining the relationship between their measured
transformational leader and outcome variables in the theoretical development
of their work (see, for example, De Poel, Stoker, & Van der Zee, 2014; Dust,
Resick, & Mawritz, 2014; Nemanich & Vera, 2009; Sun, Zhang, Qi, & Chen,
2012).

N. Siangchokyoo, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101341

4



overall research design and assessed how scholars have treated or ex-
amined follower change. We applied Ployhart and Vandenberg's (2010)
recommendations for analyzing change by categorizing studies based
on the frequency and timing in which the focal follower transformation
variables were measured. In particular, empirically capturing change
requires a “longitudinal” study in which data related to the focal
variable theorized to change is collected over three or more time points
or waves separated by a sensible unit of time. Ployhart and Vandenberg
provide two reasons for why fewer than three measures of a focal
variable is insufficient to capture change (see also Singer & Willett,
2003). First, it takes at least three measures to accurately model the
trajectory of change; with two or fewer measures, change is assumed to
be linear. More critically, with only two measures of a focal variable, it
is not possible to decompose true change from measurement error.
Accordingly, we submit that “longitudinal” studies provide the stron-
gest test of the first assumption of transformational leadership.

While not truly longitudinal by the most conservative definitions
(Day, 2011; Day et al., 2014), Singer and Willett (2003) consider two-
wave repeated-measure designs to be incrementally better than re-
search that does not capture a focal variable across multiple time per-
iods (see also Ployhart & Vandenberg, 2010). Therefore, for research
that utilized repeated-measures, we differentiate “longitudinal” from
“two-wave” quasi-longitudinal studies (see also Day, 2011; Day et al.,
2014). Another form of quasi-longitudinal research design that provides
only preliminary support for the theoretically argued longitudinal ef-
fects involves separating (across time) measurement of the focal change
variable(s) from causes and/or effects (Day, 2011). In accordance, for
studies that do not capture repeated measures of follower transforma-
tion, we differentiate those that include “temporal separation” of the

leader evaluation and focal follower transformation variable(s) from
“single time” studies that assume rather than attempt to assess follower
change.

Testing of the second assumption involved coding the follower
transformation variables captured by each study. Particularly, we coded
whether the study focused on examining follower transformation ac-
cording to Bass's theoretical propositions—1) identification with the
collective, 2) value internalization, and 3) self-efficacy—or whether the
scholars attempted to extend this theory by testing additional follower
variables.

The final assumption frames follower transformations as the ex-
planatory mechanism of the relationship between transformational
leaders and work outcomes. To test this assumption, we coded whether
the study treated focal follower variable(s) as mediator and explicitly
analyzed the mediation effect. In this regard, an “ideal study” testing
the assumptions of transformational leadership would (a) incorporate a
repeated-measures design powerful enough to capture enduring change
in the follower; (b) measuring specific, theoretically posited follower
changes; and (c) modeling follower change as a mediating mechanism
explaining the relationship between transformational leaders and work
outcomes.

Results

Table 2 presents a visualization of empirical evidence related to the
assumptions of transformational leadership theory. Surprisingly, of the
320 primary empirical studies on transformational leadership from our
literature search, only 35 studies (11%) directly assessed at least one
assumption. Notably, we were only able to locate two studies that as-
sessed elements of all three assumptions.

Tests of all three assumptions

In a field study of employees from a large multinational bank in
Hong Kong, Schaubroeck et al. (2016) used a three-wave longitudinal
design to explore whether employees' changes in beliefs about the
benefits of customer service (proxy for value internalization) and per-
ceived behavioral control (proxy for self-efficacy) mediated the effects
of transformational leaders on employee work performance. Overall,
Schaubroeck et al. (2016) found support for the assumption that
transformational leaders change followers in specific and enduring
ways. However, the authors only found partial support for the as-
sumption that follower transformation explained the link between
transformational leaders and job performance; the test of mediation
was significant for follower value internalization, but not self-efficacy.

In another longitudinal field study involving multiple observations
of follower psychological variables over time, Tims et al. (2011) as-
sessed the extent to which transformational leaders impact followers'
daily self-efficacy and optimism levels. Data on followers were collected
over five consecutive days. While followers' perceptions of transfor-
mational leaders were found to be positively related to follower day-
level optimism, the same effect was not observed for follower self-ef-
ficacy. In testing the mediating effects of these follower psychological
variables, support was found only for follower optimism to serve as a
mediator for the relationship between transformational leaders and
follower work engagement.

Across the two direct tests of all three assumptions of transforma-
tional leadership theory, both studies failed to support the importance
of follower self-efficacy. Equally important is that neither study tested
the importance of follower collective identification in relation to
transformational leaders. It must be noted, however, that theory-testing
is a collective effort; our goal is to assess whether the field, as a whole,
has sufficiently scrutinized the assumptions of transformational lea-
dership theory. In this regard, along with the two above-mentioned
studies, we were able to identify four additional studies that tested the
first assumption regarding the dynamic nature of transformational

Table 1
Journals used for systematic literature review of transformational leadership
research.

Journal Number of
article

Initial
inquiry

Impact
factor

Academy of Management Journal 24 67 6.700
Academy of Management Learning &

Education
– 15 2.866

Academy of Management
Perspectives

– 10 4.686

Administrative Science Quarterly 2 15 5.878
Group & Organization Management 25 99 3.104
Human Relations 8 71 3.043
Human Resource Management 3 59 2.474
Human Resource Management

Journal
1 9 2.343

Human Resource Management
Review

– 18 3.276

International Journal of
Management Reviews

– 4 6.489

Journal of Applied Psychology 45 124 4.643
Journal of International Business

Studies
2 27 6.198

Journal of Management 13 77 8.080
Journal of Management Studies 10 22 5.329
Journal of Occupational and

Organizational Psychology
23 70 2.892

Journal of Organizational Behavior 33 126 4.229
Leadership Quarterly 108 505 3.307
Management and Organization

Review
2 26 1.655

Management Science – 2 3.544
Organization Science 2 34 3.027
Organization Studies – 15 3.133
Organizational Behavior and Human

Decision Processes
4 28 2.259

Personnel Psychology 14 98 5.523
Research in Organizational Behavior – 7 3.238
Strategic Management Journal 1 8 5.482
Total 320 1536

N. Siangchokyoo, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101341

5



leadership, but did so by testing mediators beyond those proposed by
Bass.

Tests of Assumption 1

In a series of longitudinal field studies using daily diaries, Breevaart
et al. (2014) found support for follower transformation in ways not
theorized in previous transformational leadership literature. Breevaart
et al. (2014) asked Norwegian navel cadets to complete daily diaries
over a 34-day period. The researchers found evidence that follower
perceptions of autonomy and social support are not only influenced by
transformational leaders but that they also explain the association be-
tween transformational leaders and follower work engagement. In a
follow-up study, Breevaart et al. (2016) relied on data collected from
employees in the business service and healthcare sector once a week
over the course of five consecutive weeks to extend the mediational
pathway from transformational leadership to job performance through
work engagement. A third study of employees from a large interna-
tional brewer in the Netherlands again collected weekly measures of
follower psychological variables over five weeks. This time, Breevaart
and Zacher (2019) found followers' perception of transformational
leaders to influence change in followers' trust in leaders.

In a final longitudinal study, utilizing experience sampling metho-
dology where data were collected from health care workers four times
daily for two weeks, Bono et al. (2007) found transformational leaders
to positively impact change in followers' experience of positive emo-
tions. On the other hand, transformational leaders had no impact on
followers' experiences of negative emotions or reports of emotional
regulation over time.

A few general observations regarding tests of the first assumption of
transformational leadership theory deserve attention (see Table 2).
First, of the 135 articles that directly measured variables associated
with follower transformations, 111 (82%) relied on a measure of

follower transformation captured at a single time point and measured
the transformational leadership variable at the same time. Second,
across the 11 studies where researchers temporally separated mea-
surement of leaders and followers and the 13 studies where repeated
measurements were used to capture changes in the follower, results
were generally supportive of the assumption that transformational
leaders transform followers. Table 3 provides an overview of each of the
longitudinal studies discussed above along with studies that employed
either quasi-longitudinal or experimental research designs. This table
includes only the 24 studies in our review that included tests capable of
capturing or inferring change. Of the 51 distinct tests of follower psy-
chological variables measured in a way that either directly captures
change (e.g., repeated-measures) or allows for an inference of change
(e.g., temporal separation), 33 (65%) were statistically significant in
the hypothesized direction. Therefore, we find partial support or
Assumption 1.

One potential moderator of this association may be the unit of time
over which the relationship was observed. The separation of time be-
tween measures of transformational leaders and follower psychological
variables ranged from minutes (Lyons & Schneider, 2009) to hours
(Bono et al., 2007) to days (Tims et al., 2011) to weeks (Breevaart et al.,
2016) to months (Schaubroeck et al., 2016). Of the four studies that
tested the first assumption using repeated measures to assess changes in
follower psychological variable(s) over the span of more than 6months,
two found support whereas two did not.

Tests of Assumption 2

The second assumption of transformational leadership theory refers
to the specific ways that followers are expected to change according to
Bass's dominant transformational leadership paradigm. While an
abundance of articles use the mediating mechanisms proposed by Bass's
theory-building work—collective identity, value internalization, and

Table 2
Summary of primary empirical studies on transformational leadership (n = 320).

Follower transformation variable

Bass mediators
n = 26 (8.1%)

Other mediators
n = 109 (34.1%)

No follower transformation variables

Research design Tested Mediation Tested Mediation

Yes
n = 20 (6.3%)

No
n = 6 (1.9%)

Yes
n = 68 (21.3%)

No
n = 41 (12.8%)

Longitudinal
n = 6

n = 2 (0.6%)
Schaubroeck et al. (2016)

Tims et al. (2011)

n = 0 (0%) n = 2 (0.6%)
Breevaart et al. (2016)
Breevaart & Zacher

(2019)

n = 2 (0.6%)
Bono et al. (2007)
Breevaart et al.

(2014)
n = 185 (57.8%)

Two-Wave
n = 7

n = 1 (0.3%)
Hannah et al. (2016)

n = 1 (0.3%)
Dvir et al.
(2002)a

n = 1 (0.3%)
Lyons & Schneider

(2009)a

n = 4 (1.2%)
Barling et al. (1996)a

Bommer et al. (2005)
Hardy et al. (2010)a

Hill et al. (2012)
One-Wave, Temporal Separation

n = 11
n = 3 (0.9%)

Walumbwa et al. (2008)
Walumbwa & Hartnell

(2011)
Wang & Howell (2012)

n = 0 (0%) n = 8 (2.5%)
Braun et al. (2013)
Duan et al. (2017)

Jung & Avolio (2000)a

Kovjanic et al. (2012)
Lorinkova & Perry

(2019)
Nübold et al. (2013)a

Tucker et al. (2010)
Zhang et al., (2011)

n = 0 (0%)

One-Wave, One Time
n = 111

n = 14 (4.4%) n = 5 (1.6%)
n = 57 (17.8%) n = 35 (10.9%)

Note. Top left region represents studies that simultaneously test all three assumptions. Region along the diagonal represents studies that tested at least one as-
sumption.

a Experimental study.

N. Siangchokyoo, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101341

6



Table 3
Studies from the systematic review of transformational leadership according to the three assumptions of transformational leadership theory.

Study Assumption #1: Studied follower
change

Bass Mediators Assumption #2: Change in follower psychological variable Assumption #3: Tested whether change in follower explains the
effects of TFL

Authors Sample Y? Type of study # of
observ.

ID VI SE Studied variable Time between
first and last
measurement

TFL predicts
change in
studied
variable

Y? Outcome Findings

Barling et al.
(1996)

20 bank managers from
different regional branches
of a national bank in
Canada

✔ Two-wave pre- and
post-intervention field
experiment

2 Organizational
commitment

5 months Supported

Bommer, Rich, &
Rubin (2005)

372 employees from three
manufacturing firms in
Midwestern United States

✔ Two-wave field study 2 Cynicism about
organizational
change (-)

9 months Supported

Bono et al. (2007) 54 ambulatory healthcare
employees

✔ Longitudinal field
study

40 Feeling positive
emotions

2 weeks Supported

Feeling negative
emotions

2 weeks Not supported

Faking positive
emotions

2 weeks Not supported

Hiding negative
emotions

2 weeks Not supported

Braun et al. (2013) 360 employees from 39
academic teams (e.g.,
postdocs, Ph.D. students,
technical assistants)

One-wave, temporal
separation field study

1 Trust in the team 6 weeks Supported ✔ Job satisfaction Support for trust in
the team as mediator
of the relationship
between TFL and
follower job
satisfaction. No
support for trust in
the team as mediator
the relationship
between TFL
and team
performance

Team performance Trust in the
supervisor was also
examined as a
mediator. However,
this variable was
assessed at the same
time as follower
perception of TFL

Breevaart et al.
(2016)

57 employees from
companies in the business
service or the healthcare
sector

✔ Longitudinal field
study

5 Work engagement 5 weeks Supported ✔ Performance Follower work
engagement
mediated the
positive relationship
between TFL and
follower job
performance

(continued on next page)

N
.
Siangchokyoo,

et
al.

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101341

7



Table 3 (continued)

Study Assumption #1: Studied follower
change

Bass Mediators Assumption #2: Change in follower psychological variable Assumption #3: Tested whether change in follower explains the
effects of TFL

Authors Sample Y? Type of study # of
observ.

ID VI SE Studied variable Time between
first and last
measurement

TFL predicts
change in
studied
variable

Y? Outcome Findings

Breevaart et al.
(2014)

61 naval cadets from a
Norwegian Military
University College

✔ Longitudinal field
study

34 Perceived autonomy 34 days Supported ✔ Work engagement Follower perceived autonomy
mediated the positive relationship
between TFL and follower work
engagement

Perceived social
support

34 days Supported Follower perceived social support
mediated the positive relationship
between TFL and work engagement

Breevaart and
Zacher (2019)

59 employees from a large
international brewer in the
Netherlands

✔ Longitudinal field
study

5 Trust in leader 5 weeks Supported

Duan et al. (2017) 394 employees from private
companies in finance,
technology, food, and
manufacturing industries in
China

One-wave, temporal
separation field study

1 Voice role
perception

2 months Supported ✔ Voice behavior “transformational
leaders elicited
higher levels of
leaders' voice
expectation, which
indirectly facilitated
voice behavior
through employee
voice role
perception” (p. 663)

Dvir et al. (2002) 90 direct and 724 indirect
subordinates in Israel
Defense Forces infantry

✔ Two-wave pre- and
post-intervention field
experiment

2 ✔ Self-efficacy 6 months Not supported
✔ Collectivistic

orientation
6 months Not supported

Critical independent
approach

6 months Not supported

Extra effort 6 months Not supported
Active engagement 6 months Not supported

✔ Internalization of
moral values

6 months Not supported

Self-actualization
needs

6 months Not supported

(continued on next page)

N
.
Siangchokyoo,

et
al.

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101341

8



Table 3 (continued)

Study Assumption #1: Studied follower
change

Bass Mediators Assumption #2: Change in follower psychological variable Assumption #3: Tested whether change in follower explains the
effects of TFL

Authors Sample Y? Type of study # of
observ.

ID VI SE Studied variable Time between
first and last
measurement

TFL predicts
change in
studied
variable

Y? Outcome Findings

Hannah et al.
(2016)

357 United States Army
infantry personnel

✔ Two-wave field study 2 ✔ Value
internalization

~14 weeks Supported ✔ Performance
(leader-rated)

Follower value internalization and
self-efficacy both mediated the
positive relationship between TFL
and leader-rated follower
performance

✔ Self-efficacy ~14 weeks Supported Performance
(peer-rated)

Support for follower
value internalization
as mediator of the
relationship between
TFL and peer-rated follower
performance. No support for
follower self-efficacy as mediator of
the
relationship between
TFL and peer-rated follower
performance

Intention to report
peer transgressions

Follower value internalization and
self-efficacy both mediated the
positive relationship between TFL
and follower intention to report peer
transgressions

Hardy et al.
(2010)

85 UK Royal Marine recruits ✔ Two-wave time-series
field experiment

2 Self confidence 10 weeks Not supported
Resilience 10 weeks Not supported
Satisfaction 10 weeks Not supported

Hill et al. (2012) 531 government agency
employees

✔ Two-wave field study 2 Affective
commitment to
change

12 months Not supported

Normative
commitment to
change

12 months Not supported

Jung and Avolio
(2000)

194 students from upper
business courses at a public
university in Northeastern
United States

Postintervention-only
experimental study

1 Trust in the leader ~2 hoursb Supported ✔ Objective
performance

Follower trust in the leader mediated
the relationship between TFL on
follower performance and
satisfaction with the leader

Value congruence ~2 hoursb Supported Satisfaction with
the leader

Follower value congruence mediated
the relationship between TFL on
follower performance and
satisfaction with the leader

(continued on next page)

N
.
Siangchokyoo,

et
al.

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101341

9



Table 3 (continued)

Study Assumption #1: Studied follower
change

Bass Mediators Assumption #2: Change in follower psychological variable Assumption #3: Tested whether change in follower explains the
effects of TFL

Authors Sample Y? Type of study # of
observ.

ID VI SE Studied variable Time between
first and last
measurement

TFL predicts
change in
studied
variable

Y? Outcome Findings

Kovjanic et al.
(2012)

442 employees from
multiple organizations in
Switzerland

One-wave, temporal
separation field study

1 Autonomy need
satisfaction

4 weeks Supported ✔ Job satisfaction All three mediators mediated the
relationship between TFL and
follower job satisfaction

Competence need
satisfaction

4 weeks Supported Occupational self-
efficacy

Follower competence need
satisfaction mediated the
relationship between TFL and
follower occupational self-efficacy

Relatedness need
satisfaction

4 weeks Supported Commitment to
the leader

Follower relatedness need
satisfaction mediated the
relationship between TFL and
follower affective commitment to the
leader

Lorinkova and
Perry (2019)

260 employees of a large
skilled trade company in
mid-Atlantic United States

One-wave, temporal
separation field study

1 Helping behaviora 2 weeks Supported ✔ Group
performance

Follower helping
behavior mediated
the relationship
between TFL and
group performance

Felt obligation to
work unit

2 weeks Supported Follower felt
obligation to the
work unit mediated
the relationship
between TFL and
group performance

Lyons and
Schneider
(2009)

214 students from a
Midwestern university in
United States

✔ Two-wave pre- and
post-observation lab
experiment

2 Positive affect 3 minutesb Not supported ✔ Performance
(objective)

Leadership style had a direct rather
than an indirect influence on task
performance.

Negative affect 3 minutesb Not supported

Postintervention-only
lab experiment

1 Social Support 3 minutesb Supported
✔ Task-specific self-

efficacy
3 minutesb Supported

Nübold et al.
(2013)

81 students from various
study disciplines

Postintervention-only
lab experiment

1 Motivation
(Objective)

Not reported Supported ✔ Objective
performance

TFL interacts with
follower state core
self-evaluations to influence follower
performance. The
effects of TFL on
follower performance through
follower motivation alone was not
supported

(continued on next page)

N
.
Siangchokyoo,

et
al.

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101341

10



Table 3 (continued)

Study Assumption #1: Studied follower
change

Bass Mediators Assumption #2: Change in follower psychological variable Assumption #3: Tested whether change in follower explains the
effects of TFL

Authors Sample Y? Type of study # of
observ.

ID VI SE Studied variable Time between
first and last
measurement

TFL predicts
change in
studied
variable

Y? Outcome Findings

Schaubroeck et al.
(2016)

124 bank tellers from
multiple branches of a large
multinational bank in Hong
Kong

✔ Longitudinal field
study

3 ✔ Behavioral beliefs ~12 months Supported ✔ Service quality
adherence

Follower
behavioral beliefs
mediated the
relationship between
TFL and follower
service quality
adherence. No
support for follower
perceived behavioral
control as mediator

✔ Perceived
behavioral control

~12 months Supported Performance Follower behavioral beliefs mediated
the relationship between TFL and
follower performance. No support
for follower perceived behavioral
control as mediator

Tims et al. (2011) 42 employees from two
consultancy agencies in the
Netherlands

✔ Longitudinal field
study

5 ✔ Self-efficacy 5 days Not supported ✔ Work engagement No support for
follower self-efficacy
as mediator of the
relationship between
TFL and follower
work engagement

Optimism 5 days Supported Support for follower
optimism as
mediator of the
relationship between
TFL and follower
work engagement

Tucker et al.
(2010)

183 team members from multiple
teenage ice hockey teams

One-wave, temporal
separation field study

1 Team aggression (-)a ~4 months Supported ✔ Player aggression
(-)

Team aggression
mediated the
negative relationship
between coach's TFL
and player
aggression

Walumbwa et al.
(2008)

437 bank employees One-wave, temporal
separation field study

1 ✔ Identification with
the work unit

6 to 9 months Supported ✔ Performance Follower identification with the
work unit mediated the relationship
between TFL and supervisor rated
follower performance

✔ Self-efficacy 6 to 9 months Supported Follower self-efficacy mediated the
relationship between TFL and
supervisor rated follower
performance

(continued on next page)

N
.
Siangchokyoo,

et
al.

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101341

11



Table 3 (continued)

Study Assumption #1: Studied follower
change

Bass Mediators Assumption #2: Change in follower psychological variable Assumption #3: Tested whether change in follower explains the
effects of TFL

Authors Sample Y? Type of study # of
observ.

ID VI SE Studied variable Time between
first and last
measurement

TFL predicts
change in
studied
variable

Y? Outcome Findings

Walumbwa and
Hartnell
(2011)

426 employees from a large
automobile dealership

One-wave, temporal
separation field study

1 Identification with
the leader

3 weeks Supported ✔ Performance Follower identification with the
leader partially mediated the
relationship between TFL and
supervisor rated follower
performance

✔ Self-efficacy 6 weeks Supported Follower self-efficacy partially
mediated the relationship between
TFL and supervisor rated follower
performance

Wang and Howell
(2012)

200 employees from multi-
industry company in Canada

One-wave, temporal
separation field study

1 ✔ Group identification 2 weeks Supported ✔ Group
performance

Group identification did not mediate
the relationship between TFL and
group performance

Leader
identification

2 weeks Supported Collective Efficacy Group identification fully mediated
the relationship between TFL and
collective efficacy

Performance
(individual)

Leader identification fully mediated
the relationship between of TFL and
follower individual performance

Empowerment Leader identification
fully mediated the
effects of TFL on
follower
empowerment

Zhang, Tsui, and
Wang (2011)

973 employees from twelve
Chinese companies

One-wave, temporal
separation field study

1 Knowledge sharinga 1 month Supported ✔ Group creativity Knowledge sharing mediated the
relationship between TFL and group
creativity

Collective efficacy 1 month Supported Collective efficacy mediated the
relationship between TFL and group
creativity

Note. TFL = Transformational leaders; ID = identification with the collective or leader; VI = value internalization; SE = self-efficacy
a Not a psychological mediator
b Length of experimental session

N
.
Siangchokyoo,

et
al.

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101341

12



self-efficacy—to ground extensions of transformational leadership
theory to novel research questions (see, for instance, Chun, Cho, &
Sosik, 2016; Kang, Solomon, & Choi, 2015; Nahum-Shani & Somech,
2011; Nemanich & Keller, 2007; Richardson & Vandenberg, 2005), in
relatively few articles are these variables directly measured rather than
assumed (26 out of 320 studies, or around 8%). Moreover, only eight of
these studies employed a research design that involves either repeated-
measures of follower transformation variables or temporal separation
with measures/manipulations of transformational leaders, (three tests
of collective identification, three tests of value internalization, and
seven tests of self-efficacy).

In the only study to simultaneously explore all three of Bass's pro-
posed follower psychological transformations, Dvir et al. (2002) con-
ducted a field experimental study to assess the extent to which military
leaders in Israel's Defense Forces who completed transformational lea-
dership training would transform infantry subordinates. Their findings
failed to support the second assumption concerning follower transfor-
mation. In fact, infantry personnel supervised by leaders who attended
the transformational leadership intervention regressed in several of
their personal developments over the 6-month timeframe.

On the other hand, Hannah et al. (2016) utilized a two-wave, re-
peated-measures field study design to explore the impact of transfor-
mational leadership on United States Army infantry personnel's value
internalization and self-efficacy. Over the 14-week study window,
Hannah et al. (2016) found evidence that not only did transformational
leaders positively influence the development of these two follower
psychological variables, but both self-efficacy and value-internalization
mediated the relationship between transformational leaders and leader-
rated followers' infantry performance.

Summarizing the set of articles from Table 3, we find a general lack
of support for the second assumption. Considering the four studies that
rely on repeated-measures field study or experimental research designs
to study Bass's proposed follower psychological transformation, the
only one to explore collective identification (Dvir et al., 2002) failed to
find support. Of the three that assessed value internalization, again one
(Dvir et al., 2002) failed to find support. Finally, two of the four (Dvir
et al., 2002; Tims et al., 2011) assessments of follower self-efficacy were
not supported.

Consistent with the notion that the field is in a mature stage of

theory development where theory extensions outpace tests of theory
assumptions, the majority of articles that empirically assess follower
change explore novel follower psychological variables (109 studies) as
opposed to those proposed by Bass during early stages of theory de-
velopment (26 studies). In Table 3 alone, 34 different follower psy-
chological variables are explored, including trust in leader (Breevaart &
Zacher, 2019), felt obligation to the work unit (Lorinkova & Perry,
2019), and work engagement (Breevaart et al., 2016).

Tests of Assumption 3

Only seven out of 320 primary empirical studies on transforma-
tional leadership from our literature search directly test the third as-
sumption: that the specific, enduring follower transformations explain a
pathway through which transformational leaders produce positive work
outcomes. While the results for value internalization and collective
identification are generally supportive of this assumption, self-efficacy
plays a more tenuous role. In four cases (Hannah et al., 2016; Lyons &
Schneider, 2009; Schaubroeck et al., 2016; Tims et al., 2011), re-
searchers failed to find support for the role of this follower psycholo-
gical variable.

Discussion

Our systematic literature review revealed a relative dearth of em-
pirical attempts to validate all three major assumptions of the follower
transformation linchpin of transformational leadership theory.
Moreover, the limited evidence that does exist raises serious concerns
with several generally accepted components of this theory. In light of
our results, it is clear that we have not tested this theory with sufficient
rigor and face inadequate evidence to justify paradigm consensus.

The distribution of studies in Table 2 emphasizes transformational
leadership's status as what Edmondson and McManus (2007) refer to as
mature-stage theory development. This should come as no surprise given
the theory's rich, forty-year history. We would, thus, expect the ob-
servation that the majority of recent empirical investigations build
upon paradigm consensus by extending the domain of mediating me-
chanisms and outcomes associated with transformational leaders.

To further explore the historical development of this theory, we

Fig. 1. Empirical research on transformational leadership by year since Bass's conceptualization.
Note. Numbers represent articles obtained from 25 journals.

N. Siangchokyoo, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101341

13



present a visual depiction of the accumulation of empirical transfor-
mational leadership research in Fig. 1. Counter to expectations based on
Edmondson and McManus's (2007) evolution of theory development
was the anachronistic nature of the limited evidence that does exist
regarding theory assumptions. Instead of testing assumptions early in
the lifecycle of transformational leadership theory, in what Edmondson
and McManus refer to as intermediate-stage theory development, almost
all tests of assumptions related to the linchpin of follower transforma-
tion occurred in the last decade. In fact, of the 24 articles that measure
variables related to follower transformation with a research design that
captures change through either repeated-measures or temporal se-
paration, only two were published during the 20-year period following
publication of Bass's influential development of the modern paradigm
of transformational leadership.

Our review paints a picture of a radical leap from nascent theory to
universally accepted paradigm, where the predictive power of the
theory overshadowed its explanatory power. Our critical evaluation of
the linchpin of transformational leadership raises significant concerns
about previous interpretations and future applications of this theory.
Applying Kuhn's (1970) philosophical work on the structure of scien-
tific revolutions, the transformational leadership literature seems to be
in a crisis of confidence. As such, we recognize the need for an inter-
vention characterized by directly confronting four difficult questions:

Is transformational leadership dead?

Before offering a proposed agenda for future research, we must first
tackle the question: “is there a future in transformational leadership
research?” Fig. 1 presents disconcerting trends regarding recent scho-
larship and the outlook of this leadership theory. First, following a
period of exponential growth in the 1990s and 2000s, annual publica-
tions of empirical transformational leadership peaked in 2012. Over the
last three years, the rate of publication has declined by over 50%.
Moreover, while paradigm consensus at the theory-level remains
strong, there appears to have been a substantive shift away from—-
rather than towards—paradigm consensus at the operational-level. No
fewer than thirteen different operationalizations of transformational
leadership were identified in our literature review. In 2004, more than
86% of empirical studies utilized a single measure of transformational
leaders—the MLQ. By 2019, the number has decreased year-over-year
to 68%.3 One might identify rational explanations for these trends. For
instance, it could be that access to free, publicly available, and psy-
chometrically sound measures of transformational leadership (e.g.,
Transformational Leadership Inventory; Podsakoff et al., 1990) have
spurred the relative decline in MLQ popularity. However, it is hard to
ignore the role that scathing criticisms of fundamental flaws in trans-
formational leadership theory in conjunction with the introduction of
newer, shinier leadership constructs have played in this precipitously
declining trend. If transformational leadership is not dead, it is surely
dying. If steps are not taken to address the conditions responsible for its
decline, a full recovery to previous levels of activity seems a foolish
prognosis.

Should we revive transformational leadership theory?

Given the issues raised in this and other reviews, we must consider

the rationality in attempting to salvage transformational leadership
theory. On the one hand, as Merton (1973) noted, the hallmark of
science is in its self-correction in the pursuit of truth and knowledge. On
the other hand, there is a sea of difference between correcting a single
scientific claim and correcting a theory that enjoyed paradigm con-
sensus for more than twenty years and has been referenced or directly
tested in nearly all leadership scholarship outlets to date. Even if pos-
sible, reviving transformational leadership theory will involve a Her-
culean effort.

Up to this point, our findings and recommendations dovetail with
van Knippenberg and Sitkin's (2013) critique of transformational lea-
dership. Here, we note a first significant divergence. Weighing the da-
mages, van Knippenberg and Sitkin (2013) recommend completely
abandoning transformational leadership. We wonder whether such an
approach represents “throwing the baby out with the bathwater”. If it
can be salvaged, we see redeeming qualities in the underlying foun-
dation of transformational leadership theory as an explanation for the
process through which leaders play a role in transforming followers into
qualitatively superior employees. As Lewin (1943) famously quipped,
“there is nothing as practical as good theory”. It is our perspective that
transformational leadership, as envisioned by Burns, is a good theory
that has been part of the collective consciousness of organizational
science for decades. This is perhaps due to the parsimony of its senti-
ment that leaders can transform followers, ultimately aligning the goals
of the followers with the goals of the collective organization to incite
greater performance at individual, group, and organizational levels.
The foundation of transformational leadership theory—elegant in its
simplicity—is strong. Yet our review highlights significant concerns
with the structural integrity of the levels built upon its foundation, in
particular, the specification and operationalization of (a) leader beha-
viors that elicit follower transformation and (b) systematic ways in
which followers are transformed.

Reviews of similar leadership theories—most saliently, authentic
leadership (see Gardner, Cogliser, Davis, & Dickens, 2011) and servant
leadership (see Van Dierendonck, 2011)—have highlighted these fields'
difficulties progressing to mature-stage research due to the proliferation
of parallel perspectives, propositions, and operationalizations during
early stages of theory development (Gardner et al., 2011; Van
Dierendonck, 2011). Despite the growing pains associated with the
maturation process, alternative perspectives can create a “survival-of-
the-fittest” research mentality which fosters opportunities for discovery
and pruning weak ideas through competition for empirical support
(Kuhn, 1970). We note that the transformational leadership field suffers
from diametric issues: not enough competition of ideas and acceptance
of major assumptions at face value. While we take the stance that
transformational leadership is “good theory”, we question whether we
have satisficed along the way by bypassing the conflict often associated
with typical early-stage research paradigms.

Can we revive transformational leadership theory?

van Knippenberg and Sitkin (2013)'s criticisms rest on their asser-
tion that it is impossible to disentangle operationalizations of trans-
formational leader behaviors from the process of transformational
leadership. A second significant diversion from their critique is that we
see disentanglement as a difficult but necessary step to reviving trans-
formational leadership. One doesn't have to stray far from the trans-
formational leadership literature to identify an example of scholars
working through the labors of reviving a construct that suffers from the
lack of a clear separation between the attributes and behaviors of lea-
ders and their theorized outcomes (Antonakis et al., 2016; van
Knippenberg & Sitkin, 2013; Yukl, 1998, 1999). Using signaling theory
as the foundation, Antonakis et al. (2016) re-conceptualized charisma
as a set of signals, thus offering a more precise definition of charisma
without the tautological risks inherent in previous definitions. Trans-
formational leadership historically faces similar threats to its validity.

3 A further analysis of trends in operationalizations of transformational lea-
dership warrants two observations. First, the decline in MLQ-usage was almost
entirely offset by an increase in usage of Podsakoff et al.'s (1990) Transfor-
mational Leadership Inventory; no other operationalization of transformational
leadership has been used in more than 2% of empirical studies of transforma-
tional leadership. Second, even when researchers use measures other than the
MLQ, they often convert non-MLQ measures into the dimensional labels used by
the MLQ or suggest scale equivalence (e.g., Hill et al., 2012; McColl-Kennedy &
Anderson, 2002; Parr, Hunter, & Ligon, 2013; Seo et al., 2012).

N. Siangchokyoo, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101341

14



Antonakis et al. (2016) write, “Charisma is a values-based, symbolic,
and emotion-laden leader signaling” (p. 310), thus strategically separ-
ating the intent of the leader from the real effect. Such segregation of
leader behavior from the influence the leader actually wields is ad-
ditionally noted in research detailing the process through which in-
dividuals claim leadership via behaviors and others grant those in-
dividuals leadership due in part to perceptions of effective influence
(DeRue & Ashford, 2010). We must not forget that while follower
transformation is central to transformational leadership, so too is the
leader.

A final significant departure from van Knippenberg and Sitkin
(2013) is that where they offer a description of major flaws in trans-
formational leadership theory, we suggest reasons for the why these
issues arose. Importantly, embedded in the “why's” are opportunities to
address these flaws:

- If the transformational leadership field made a radical leap from
nascent theory to mature-stage research, then we need to change
course by mandating a moratorium on extending transformational
leadership theory until we accumulate sufficient evidence of the
major theory propositions regarding follower transformation.

- If new evidence fails to support major propositions of transforma-
tional leadership theory, then we need to revert to nascent-stage
research characterized by qualitative studies and iterative theory-
building efforts.

- If we are revising major tenets of transformational leadership
theory, then we need to make sure revisions address current short-
comings, most notably, conceptual ambiguity regarding the dis-
tinction between the process of transformational leadership and the
qualities/actions of transformational leaders.

- If new theory is constructed, then we need to focus on devising and
testing new operationalizations of theory constructs.

These suggestions are grounded in a systematic, deliberate de-evo-
lution (from mature to intermediate to nascent) and subsequent re-
evolution through Edmondson and McManus's (2007) conventional
stages of theory development.4 Through this journey, we are afforded
the luxury of being able to learn from previous gaffes by valuing
longitudinal research designs that allow for direct tests of follower
transformation and assuring that the challenges of each developmental
stage are met before advancing to the aims of subsequent stages. Ad-
mittedly, this is easier said than done.

How do we revive transformational leadership theory?

In this section, we offer several specific avenues of future research
that could contribute to tearing transformational leadership down to its
foundation and rebuilding stronger theory, better measures, and more
actionable leader and leadership models. Until the major transforma-
tional leadership issues are rectified and new paradigm consensus is
achieved, we think it is prudent to refrain from theory-extension re-
search grounded in untested assumptions regarding both the

operationalization of transformational leaders and the process of fol-
lower transformations.

The most obvious extension of this literature review is the need for
rigorous tests of paradigm assumptions. Our literature review is meant
to guide researchers regarding choices related to research design, study
variables, and analytic strategies. In particular, we hope that as future
research drawing on longitudinal and experimental designs and mod-
eling changes in follower's collective identification, value internaliza-
tion, and self-efficacy accumulate, the field can better assess anomalies
in the transformational leadership paradigm. A meta-analysis of the
transformational leadership process model would be an excellent way
to probe major paradigm assumptions.

While our review differs from previous critiques in terms of its focus
on the follower transformation process rather than transformational
leader attributes and behaviors, it must be stated that rebuilding con-
fidence in transformational leadership theory will require rectifying
both issues. If, for instance, the MLQ and other measures of transfor-
mational leader dimensions are flawed, then interpreting evidence for
follower transformation (based on associations between these flawed
instruments and Burns' mediating mechanisms) is ill-advised.5 In this
regard, we suggest that even testing the assumptions of transforma-
tional leadership theory (as suggested above) may be premature. In-
stead, we call for a return to the nascent-stage of theory development,
characterized by the application of inductive research methodologies.

In returning to the nascent stage, our goal would be to re-examine
the intrapersonal and interpersonal dynamics between leaders and
followers with a focus on (a) the ways that followers are transformed
and (b) the behaviors that induce these transformations. A key ad-
vantage of going back to the nascent stage is that it requires the use of
inductive research. Inductive studies would be particularly beneficial to
the criticisms we present in this review because they allow researchers
to capture and flesh out follower psychological variables that reflect the
critical and enduring changes initiated by transformational leaders.
These may include observations of leader-follower interactions to
identify transformational leader behaviors and interviews with fol-
lowers to pinpoint the ways in which followers internalize the trans-
formational efforts of their leaders. By applying grounded theory
(Glaser & Strauss, 1967), transformational leadership scholars would
stay as close to the natural phenomenon as possible, allowing themes to
emerge organically. Through an inductive study of this theory, we may
find that follower psychological variables alternative to the three that
were originally theorized are transformed by leaders and new re-
lationships among transformed variables more deeply explain how
leaders transform their followers. Further, utilizing “member checks”
(asking informants to read and provide feedback on grounded theory
coding system) is the first obstacle to validity of this revived transfor-
mational leadership.

Another primary advantage of the grounded theory is the iterative
approach between qualitative data and the literature because it can
situate emerging concepts within the nomological framework of ex-
isting constructs. Doing so allows for inclusion of previously identified
ways in which followers transform. For example, Bommer, Rich, and
Rubin (2005) found that transformational leadership was able to reduce
their followers' cynicism about organizational change. Moreover, Duan
et al. (2017) found that by strengthening follower perceptions that their
voices mattered, transformational leaders were able to increase their
likelihood that their followers would engage in voice behavior.

Perhaps an ideal nascent study to investigate follower transforma-
tions and begin to examine attributes and behaviors of transformational
leaders is through a longitudinal qualitative diary study wherein par-
ticipants are prompted to reflect each evening on daily experiences with
their leader (Gover & Duxbury, 2018, for example of a longitudinal
qualitative study). Such a study design presents an opportunity to

4 While Edmondson and McManus (2007) offer a useful prescriptive approach
to paradigm development, we note that scientific philosopher Thomas Kuhn
presents a more descriptive account of how “normal science” occurs. In his
treatise on scientific revolution, Kuhn (1970) suggests that once researchers
accept a paradigm, they typically take theoretical assumptions for granted until
a crisis of confidence occurs. At that stage, scientists either probe assumptions
until the crisis is resolved or abandon the paradigm for new paradigms, re-
sulting in scientific revolution. Both approaches lead to a similar explanation
for the current state of affairs uncovered in this review (insufficient evidence for
paradigm assumptions) and offer a similar call to action to address anomalies
that have been uncovered. However, according to Kuhn, the history of trans-
formational leadership scholarship is closer to the norm than an exception. We
thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing this out. 5 We thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing this out

N. Siangchokyoo, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101341

15



unveil how followers internalize the values espoused by the transfor-
mational leaders over time. Research on learning and development
demonstrate that internalization may not be a one-time phenomenon;
instead, repetition and practice encourage the internalization process
(e.g., Moulton et al., 2006). Qualitative research, including a series of
interviews or daily/weekly diary studies, are particularly advantageous
in capturing this type of information.

Of course, in their daily reflections, followers would also identify
particularly influential leader behaviors, allowing us to expand and
refine our conceptualization of a transformational leader. In a similar
example, Egri and Herman (2000) interviewed more than 70 leaders,
conducted a content analysis of the responses and while they identified
the notable “four I's,” they also found evidence of additional transfor-
mational leader behaviors including collaboration, empowerment, and
two-way communication. While these scholars used self-reported lea-
dership styles, it is still illustrative of the opportunities for transfor-
mational leadership scholarship provided by inductive research.

A solid foundation built via grounded theory provides the stability
for transformational leadership theory to evolve. The next hurdle for
this theory is to replicate and extend the relationships found using in-
ductive research. Though this review does raise awareness that re-
plications of transformational leadership assumptions are lacking, it
does not address more systemic problems related to the lack of in-
centives to publish replications. As Koole and Lakens (2012) note, un-
less journals become more open to publishing replications and scholars
begin citing replications, there is little incentive for researchers to al-
locate efforts to replication studies. In this regard, we applaud recent
efforts from editors of management science journals to communicate
the value of replications and create avenues for replication studies to be
published (e.g., Antonakis, 2017a, 2017b; Bamberger, 2019).

Scholars also need to test and refine main assumptions on the path
to new paradigm consensus. Mixed-methodologies are best equipped to
do this. An example mixed-method study focusing on follower trans-
formation would test potential mediators identified via inductive stu-
dies, complementing traditional quantitative approaches to theory-
testing with qualitative interviews to open up the black box of follower
transformation. Rarely have we considered the dynamic process
through which follower transformation occurs.

A hallmark of these types of studies (intermediate studies;
Edmondson & McManus, 2007) is the integration of distinct and re-
levant theories to help explain previously or currently unexplainable
processes and organize theoretical predictions. Scholars have pre-
viously recommended theories such as social learning theory (Bandura,
1977), social exchange theory (Blau, 1964; Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1995),
and social identity theory (Ashforth & Mael, 1989) to explain why
transformational leader behaviors result in positive follower psycholo-
gical changes. Inherent in these are social experiences and while there
is no doubt that leadership is interactive, the effects of leadership, those
Bass and others have proposed transform followers, are likely less in-
trapersonal and more interpersonal. This distinction introduces oppor-
tunities to integrate other established theories to further illustrate how
leaders influence followers (see Kovjanic et al., 2012), such as self-
regulation theory (Lord, Diefendorff, Schmidt, & Hall, 2010) and the-
ories about emotions (e.g., affective events theory; Weiss &
Cropanzano, 1996).

Addressing the myriad issues with this theory will be a time-con-
suming journey requiring a collaborative effort. However, we recognize
the opportunity inherent in remodeling a theory with such a simple,
intuitive, and practicable base. We hope that by drawing on previous
leadership research, focusing on follower transformation as the nexus of
our understanding of the transformational leadership process during
nascent theory-building phases of research, and remaining cognizant of
the important milestones in the development of theoretical paradigms,
we may create a richer theory of transformational leadership.

Conclusion

In closing, our systematic literature review raises concerns about the
development of transformational leadership theory and the lack of
empirical evidence for fundamental assumptions regarding follower
transformation. Given the current state of the literature, we hope to
stimulate difficult conversations about the future of transformational
leadership scholarship. The trajectory of the programmatic research
efforts will depend on navigating through these issues.

Declaration of Competing Interest

All authors contributed equally to this work.

References

Antonakis, J. (2017a). The future of the leadership quarterly. The Leadership Quarterly,
28(1), 1–4.

Antonakis, J. (2017b). On doing better science: From thrill of discovery to policy im-
plications. The Leadership Quarterly, 28(1), 5–21.

Antonakis, J., Avolio, B. J., & Sivasubramaniam, N. (2003). Context and leadership: An
examination of the nine-factor full-range leadership theory using the Multifactor
Leadership Questionnaire. The Leadership Quarterly, 14(3), 261–295.

Antonakis, J., Bastardoz, N., Jacquart, P., & Shamir, B. (2016). Charisma: An ill-defined
and ill-measured gift. Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational
Behavior, 3(1), 293–319.

Antonakis, J., & House, R. J. (2013). The full-range leadership theory: The way forward.
In B. J. Avolio, & F. J. Yammario (Eds.). Transformational and charismatic leadership:
The road ahead 10th anniversary edition (pp. 3–33). Emerald Group Publishing
Limited.

Ashforth, B. E., & Mael, F. (1989). Social identity theory and the organization. The
Academy of Management Review, 14(1), 20–39.

Avolio, B. J., & Bass, B. M. (1988). Transformational leadership, charisma, and beyond.
Emerging leadership vistas (pp. 29–49). Lexington, MA, England: Lexington Books/D.
C. Heath and Com.

Avolio, B. J., & Bass, B. M. (1995). Individual consideration viewed at multiple levels of
analysis: A multi-level framework for examining the diffusion of transformational
leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 6(2), 199–218.

Avolio, B. J., & Yammarino, F. J. (2013). Introduction to, and overview of, transforma-
tional and charismatic leadership. Transformational and charismatic leadership: The
road ahead 10th anniversary edition (pp. xxvii–xxxiii). Emerald Group Publishing
Limited.

Bamberger, P. A. (2019). On the Replicability of Abductive research in management and
organizations: Internal replication and its alternatives. Academy of Management
Discoveries, 5(2), 103–108.

Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change.
Psychological Review, 84(2), 191.

Barling, J., Weber, T., & Kelloway, E. K. (1996). Effects of transformational leadership
training on attitudinal and financial outcomes: A field experiment. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 81(6), 827–832.

Barnes, C. M., Guarana, C. L., Nauman, S., & Kong, D. T. (2016). Too tired to inspire or be
inspired: Sleep deprivation and charismatic leadership. Journal of Applied Psychology,
101(8), 1191–1199.

Bass, B. M. (1985). Leadership and performance beyond expectations. New York, NY: Free
Press.

Bass, B. M. (1990). From transactional to transformational leadership: Learning to share
the vision. Organizational Dynamics, 18(3), 19–31.

Bass, B. M. (1998). Transformational leadership: Industrial, military, and educational impact.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Bass, B. M., & Avolio, B. J. (1995). Manual for the multifactor leadership questionnaire: Rater
form (5X short). Palo Alto, CA: Mind Garden.

Bass, B. M., Avolio, B. J., & Goodheim, L. (1987). Biography and the assessment of
transformational leadership at the world-class level. Journal of Management, 13(1),
7–19.

Bass, B. M., & Riggio, R. E. (2006). Transformational leadership (2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Bass, B. M., & Steidlmeier, P. (1999). Ethics, character, and authentic transformational
leadership behavior. The Leadership Quarterly, 10(2), 181–217.

Bass, B. M., Waldman, D. A., Avolio, B. J., & Bebb, M. (1987). Transformational leader-
ship and the falling dominoes effect. Group & Organization Studies, 12(1), 73–87.

Behrendt, P., Matz, S., & Göritz, A. S. (2017). An integrative model of leadership beha-
vior. The Leadership Quarterly, 28(1), 229–244.

Blau, P. (1964). Exchange and power in social life. New York: Wiley.
Bommer, W. H., Rich, G. A., & Rubin, R. S. (2005). Changing attitudes about change:

Longitudinal effects of transformational leader behavior on employee cynicism about
organizational change. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 26(7), 733–753.

Bommer, W. H., Rubin, R. S., & Baldwin, T. T. (2004). Setting the stage for effective
leadership: Antecedents of transformational leadership behavior. The Leadership
Quarterly, 15(2), 195–210.

Bono, J. E., Foldes, H. J., Vinson, G., & Muros, J. P. (2007). Workplace emotions: The role
of supervision and leadership. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92(5), 1357–1367.

N. Siangchokyoo, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101341

16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0130


Braun, S., Peus, C., Weisweiler, S., & Frey, D. (2013). Transformational leadership, job
satisfaction, and team performance: A multilevel mediation model of trust. The
Leadership Quarterly, 24(1), 270–283.

Breevaart, K., Bakker, A., Hetland, J., Demerouti, E., Olsen, O. K., & Espevik, R. (2014).
Daily transactional and transformational leadership and daily employee engagement.
Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 87(1), 138–157.

Breevaart, K., Bakker, A. B., Demerouti, E., & Derks, D. (2016). Who takes the lead? A
multi-source diary study on leadership, work engagement, and job performance.
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 37(3), 309–325.

Breevaart, K., & Zacher, H. (2019). Main and interactive effects of weekly transforma-
tional and laissez-faire leadership on followers' trust in the leader and leader effec-
tiveness. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 92(2), 384–409.

Burns, J. M. (1978). Leadership. New York: Harper & Row.
Chun, J. U., Cho, K., & Sosik, J. J. (2016). A multilevel study of group-focused and in-

dividual-focused transformational leadership, social exchange relationships, and
performance in teams. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 37(3), 374–396.

Cole, S. (1983). The hierarchy of the sciences? American Journal of Sociology, 89(1),
111–139.

Conger, J. A., & Kanungo, R. N. (1987). Toward a behavioral theory of charismatic lea-
dership in organizational settings. The Academy of Management Review, 12(4),
637–647.

Conger, J. A., & Kanungo, R. N. (1994). Charismatic leadership in organizations:
Perceived behavioral attributes and their measurement. Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 15(5), 439–452.

Day, D. V. (2000). Leadership development: A review in context. The Leadership Quarterly,
11(4), 581–613.

Day, D. V. (2011). Leadership development. In A. Bryman, C.D, K. Grint, B. Jackson, & M.
Uhl-Bien (Eds.). The SAGE handbook of leadership (pp. 37–50). London: Sage.

Day, D. V., & Antonakis, J. (2012). The nature of leadership (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks,
Calif: SAGE.

Day, D. V., Fleenor, J. W., Atwater, L. E., Sturm, R. E., & McKee, R. A. (2014). Advances in
leader and leadership development: A review of 25 years of research and theory. The
Leadership Quarterly, 25(1), 63–82.

De Poel, F. M., Stoker, J. I., & Van der Zee, K. I. (2014). Leadership and organizational
tenure diversity as determinants of project team effectiveness. Group & Organization
Management, 39(5), 532–560.

DeRue, D. S., & Ashford, S. J. (2010). Who will lead and who will follow? A social process
of leadership identity construction in organizations. The Academy of Management
Review, 35(4), 627–647.

DeRue, D. S., Nahrgang, J. D., Wellman, N. E. D., & Humphrey, S. E. (2011). Trait and
behavioral theories of leadership: An investigation and meta-analytic test of their
relative validity. Personnel Psychology, 64(1), 7–52.

van Dierendonck, D., Stam, D., Boersma, P., de Windt, N., & Alkema, J. (2014). Same
difference? Exploring the differential mechanisms linking servant leadership and
transformational leadership to follower outcomes. The Leadership Quarterly, 25(3),
544–562.

Dinh, J. E., Lord, R. G., Gardner, W. L., Meuser, J. D., Liden, R. C., & Hu, J. (2014).
Leadership theory and research in the new millennium: Current theoretical trends
and changing perspectives. The Leadership Quarterly, 25(1), 36–62.

Duan, J., Li, C., Xu, Y., & Wu, C.-h. (2017). Transformational leadership and employee
voice behavior: A Pygmalion mechanism. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 38(5),
650–670.

Dust, S. B., Resick, C. J., & Mawritz, M. B. (2014). Transformational leadership, psy-
chological empowerment, and the moderating role of mechanistic–organic contexts.
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 35(3), 413–433.

Dvir, T., Eden, D., Avolio, B. J., & Shamir, B. (2002). Impact of transformational lea-
dership on follower development and performance: A field experiment. Academy of
Management Journal, 45(4), 735–744.

Edmondson, A. C., & McManus, S. E. (2007). Methodological fit in management field
research. Academy of Management Review, 32(4), 1246–1264.

Egri, C. P., & Herman, S. (2000). Leadership in the north American environmental sector:
Values, leadership styles, and contexts of environmental leaders and their organiza-
tions. Academy of Management Journal, 43(4), 571–604.

Fischer, T., Dietz, J., & Antonakis, J. (2017). Leadership process models: A review and
synthesis. Journal of Management, 43(6), 1726–1753.

Gardner, W. L., Cogliser, C. C., Davis, K. M., & Dickens, M. P. (2011). Authentic leader-
ship: A review of the literature and research agenda. The Leadership Quarterly, 22(6),
1120–1145.

Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative
research. Mill Valley, CA: Sociology Press.

Gover, L., & Duxbury, L. (2018). Making sense of organizational change: Is hindsight
really 20/20? Journal of Organizational Behavior, 39(1), 39–51.

Graen, G. B., & Uhl-Bien, M. (1995). Relationship-based approach to leadership:
Development of leader-member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 25 years:
Applying a multi-level multi-domain perspective. The Leadership Quarterly, 6(2),
219–247.

Hannah, S. T., Schaubroeck, J. M., & Peng, A. C. (2016). Transforming followers' value
internalization and role self-efficacy: Dual processes promoting performance and peer
norm-enforcement. Journal of Applied Psychology, 101(2), 252–266.

Hardy, L., Arthur, C. A., Jones, G., Shariff, A., Munnoch, K., Isaacs, I., & Allsopp, A. J.
(2010). The relationship between transformational leadership behaviors, psycholo-
gical, and training outcomes in elite military recruits. The Leadership Quarterly, 21(1),
20–32.

Hill, N. S., Seo, M. G., Kang, J. H., & Taylor, M. S. (2012). Building employee commitment
to change across organizational levels: The influence of hierarchical distance and
direct managers' transformational leadership. Organization Science, 23(3), 758–777.

Hoch, J. E., Bommer, W. H., Dulebohn, J. H., & Wu, D. (2016). Do ethical, authentic, and
servant leadership explain variance above and beyond transformational leadership?
A meta-analysis. Journal of Management, 44(2), 501–529.

House, R. J., Woycke, J., & Fodor, E. M. (1988). Charismatic and noncharismatic leaders:
Differences in behavior and effectiveness. Charismatic leadership: The elusive factor in
organizational effectiveness (pp. 98–121). San Francisco, CA, US: Jossey-Bass.

Hu, J., Erdogan, B., Jiang, K., Bauer, T. N., & Liu, S. (2018). Leader humility and team
creativity: The role of team information sharing, psychological safety, and power
distance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 103(3), 313–323.

Jiang, Y., & Chen, C. C. (2018). Integrating knowledge activities for team innovation:
Effects of transformational leadership. Journal of Management, 44(5), 1819–1847.

Jiang, Y., Jackson, S. E., & Colakoglu, S. (2016). An empirical examination of personal
learning within the context of teams. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 37(5),
654–672.

Jin, S., Seo, M.-G., & Shapiro, D. L. (2016). Do happy leaders lead better? Affective and
attitudinal antecedents of transformational leadership. The Leadership Quarterly,
27(1), 64–84.

Judge, T. A., & Piccolo, R. F. (2004). Transformational and transactional leadership: A
meta-analytic test of their relative validity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(5),
755–768.

Jung, D. I., & Avolio, B. J. (2000). Opening the black box: An experimental investigation
of the mediating effects of trust and value congruence on transformational and
transactional leadership. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 21(8), 949–964.

Kang, J. H., Solomon, G. T., & Choi, D. Y. (2015). CEOs' leadership styles and managers'
innovative behaviour: Investigation of intervening effects in an entrepreneurial
context. Journal of Management Studies, 52(4), 531–554.

van Knippenberg, D., & Sitkin, S. B. (2013). A critical assessment of charismatic—-
transformational leadership research: Back to the drawing board? Academy of
Management Annals, 7(1), 1–60.

Koole, S. L., & Lakens, D. (2012). Rewarding replications: A sure and simple way to
improve psychological science. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(6), 608–614.

Koseoglu, G., Liu, Y., & Shalley, C. E. (2017). Working with creative leaders: Exploring the
relationship between supervisors' and subordinates' creativity. The Leadership
Quarterly, 28(6), 798–811.

Kovjanic, S., Schuh, S. C., Jonas, K., Quaquebeke, N. V., & van Dick, R. (2012). How do
transformational leaders foster positive employee outcomes? A self-determination-
based analysis of employees' needs as mediating links. Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 33(8), 1031–1052.

Kuhn, T. S. (1970). The structure of scientific revolutions (2nd ed.). Chicago: University of
Chicago Press enlarged.

Lewin, K. (1943). Defining the ‘field at a given time’. Psychological Review, 50(3),
292–310.

Li, C., Zhao, H., & Begley, T. M. (2015). Transformational leadership dimensions and
employee creativity in China: A cross-level analysis. Journal of Business Research,
68(6), 1149–1156.

Li, G., Rubenstein, A. L., Lin, W., Wang, M., & Chen, X. (2018). The curvilinear effect of
benevolent leadership on team performance: The mediating role of team action
processes and the moderating role of team commitment. Personnel Psychology, 71(3),
369–397.

Li, V., Mitchell, R., & Boyle, B. (2015). The divergent effects of transformational lea-
dership on individual and team innovation. Group & Organization Management, 41(1),
66–97.

Lord, R. G., Diefendorff, J. M., Schmidt, A. M., & Hall, R. J. (2010). Self-regulation at
work. Annual Review of Psychology, 61(1), 543–568.

Lorinkova, N. M., & Perry, S. J. (2019). The importance of group-focused transforma-
tional leadership and felt obligation for helping and group performance. Journal of
Organizational Behavior, 40(3), 231–247.

Lowe, K. B., Kroeck, K. G., & Sivasubramaniam, N. (1996). Effectiveness correlates of
transformational and transactional leadership: A meta-analytic review of the mlq
literature. The Leadership Quarterly, 7(3), 385–425.

Lyons, J. B., & Schneider, T. R. (2009). The effects of leadership style on stress outcomes.
The Leadership Quarterly, 20(5), 737–748.

McColl-Kennedy, J. R., & Anderson, R. D. (2002). Impact of leadership style and emotions
on subordinate performance. The Leadership Quarterly, 13(5), 545–559.

Menges, J. I., Walter, F., Vogel, B., & Bruch, H. (2011). Transformational leadership
climate: Performance linkages, mechanisms, and boundary conditions at the orga-
nizational level. The Leadership Quarterly, 22(5), 893–909.

Merton, R. K. (1973). The sociology of science, theoretical and empirical investigations.
Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.

Mitchell, R., Boyle, B., Parker, V., Giles, M., Joyce, P., & Chiang, V. (2014).
Transformation through tension: The moderating impact of negative affect on
transformational leadership in teams. Human Relations, 67(9), 1095–1121.

Moulton, C.-A. E., Dubrowski, A., MacRae, H., Graham, B., Grober, E., & Reznick, R.
(2006). Teaching surgical skills: What kind of practice makes perfect?: A randomized,
controlled trial. Annals of Surgery, 244(3), 400–409.

Nahum-Shani, I., & Somech, A. (2011). Leadership, OCB and individual differences:
Idiocentrism and allocentrism as moderators of the relationship between transfor-
mational and transactional leadership and OCB. The Leadership Quarterly, 22(2),
353–366.

Nemanich, L. A., & Keller, R. T. (2007). Transformational leadership in an acquisition: A
field study of employees. The Leadership Quarterly, 18(1), 49–68.

Nemanich, L. A., & Vera, D. (2009). Transformational leadership and ambidexterity in the
context of an acquisition. The Leadership Quarterly, 20(1), 19–33.

Ng, T. W. (2017). Transformational leadership and performance outcomes: Analyses of
multiple mediation pathways. The Leadership Quarterly, 28(3), 385–417.

Northouse, P. G. (2016). Leadership: Theory and practice (7th ed.). Thousand Oaks,

N. Siangchokyoo, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101341

17

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0445


California: SAGE.
Nübold, A., Muck, P. M., & Maier, G. W. (2013). A new substitute for leadership?

Followers' state core self-evaluations. The Leadership Quarterly, 24(1), 29–44.
Parr, A. D., Hunter, S. T., & Ligon, G. S. (2013). Questioning universal applicability of

transformational leadership: Examining employees with autism spectrum disorder.
The Leadership Quarterly, 24(4), 608–622.

Pfeffer, J. (1993). Barriers to the advance of organizational science: Paradigm develop-
ment as a dependent variable. Academy of Management Review, 18(4), 599–620.

Ployhart, R. E., & Vandenberg, R. J. (2010). Longitudinal research: The theory, design,
and analysis of change. Journal of Management, 36(1), 94–120.

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Moorman, R. H., & Fetter, R. (1990). Transformational
leader behaviors and their effects on followers' trust in leader, satisfaction, and or-
ganizational citizenship behaviors. The Leadership Quarterly, 1(2), 107–142.

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Podsakoff, N. P., & Lee, J. Y. (2003). The mismeasure
of man(agement) and its implications for leadership research. The Leadership
Quarterly, 14(6), 615–656.

Rafferty, A. E., & Griffin, M. A. (2004). Dimensions of transformational leadership:
Conceptual and empirical extensions. The Leadership Quarterly, 15(3), 329–354.

Reichard, R. J., Riggio, R. E., Guerin, D. W., Oliver, P. H., Gottfried, A. W., & Gottfried, A.
E. (2011). A longitudinal analysis of relationships between adolescent personality
and intelligence with adult leader emergence and transformational leadership. The
Leadership Quarterly, 22(3), 471–481.

Richardson, H. A., & Vandenberg, R. J. (2005). Integrating managerial perceptions and
transformational leadership into a work-unit level model of employee involvement.
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 26(5), 561–589.

Rosen, C. C., Simon, L. S., Gajendran, R. S., Johnson, R. E., Lee, H. W., & Lin, S.-H. (2019).
Boxed in by your inbox: Implications of daily e-mail demands for managers' leader-
ship behaviors. Journal of Applied Psychology, 104(1), 19–33.

Schaubroeck, J. M., Lam, S. S. K., & Peng, A. C. (2016). Can peers' ethical and transfor-
mational leadership improve coworkers' service quality? A latent growth analysis.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 133, 45–58.

Schriesheim, C. A., Wu, J. B., & Scandura, T. A. (2009). A meso measure? Examination of
the levels of analysis of the multifactor leadership questionnaire (MLQ). The
Leadership Quarterly, 20(4), 604–616.

Seo, M. G., Taylor, M. S., Hill, N. S., Zhang, X., Tesluk, P. E., & Lorinkova, N. M. (2012).
The role of affect and leadership during organizational change. Personnel Psychology,
65(1), 121–165.

Shamir, B., House, R. J., & Arthur, M. B. (1993). The motivational effects of charismatic
leadership: A self-concept based theory. Organization Science, 4(4), 577–594.

Shamir, B., Zakay, E., Breinin, E., & Popper, M. (1998). Correlates of charismatic leader
behavior in military units: Subordinates' attitudes, unit characteristics, and superiors'
appraisals of leader performance. The Academy of Management Journal, 41(4),

387–409.
Singer, J. D., & Willett, J. B. (2003). Applied longitudinal data analysis: Modeling change and

event occurrence. Oxford university press.
Sun, L. Y., Zhang, Z., Qi, J., & Chen, Z. X. (2012). Empowerment and creativity: A cross-

level investigation. The Leadership Quarterly, 23(1), 55–65.
Tims, M., Bakker, A. B., & Xanthopoulou, D. (2011). Do transformational leaders enhance

their followers' daily work engagement? The Leadership Quarterly, 22(1), 121–131.
Tucker, S., Turner, N., Barling, J., & McEvoy, M. (2010). Transformational leadership and

childrens' aggression in team settings: A short-term longitudinal study. The Leadership
Quarterly, 21(3), 389–399.

Vaccaro, I. G., Jansen, J. J. P., Van Den Bosch, F. A. J., & Volberda, H. W. (2012).
Management innovation and leadership: The moderating role of organizational size.
Journal of Management Studies, 49(1), 28–51.

Van Dierendonck, D. (2011). Servant leadership: A review and synthesis. Journal of
Management, 37(4), 1228–1261.

Walumbwa, F. O., Avolio, B. J., & Zhu, W. (2008). How transformational leadership
weaves its influence on individual job performance: The role of identification and
efficacy beliefs. Personnel Psychology, 61(4), 793–825.

Walumbwa, F. O., & Hartnell, C. A. (2011). Understanding transformational leader-
ship–employee performance links: The role of relational identification and self-effi-
cacy. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 84(1), 153–172.

Wang, G., Oh, I.-S., Courtright, S. H., & Colbert, A. E. (2011). Transformational leadership
and performance across criteria and levels: A meta-analytic review of 25 years of
research. Group & Organization Management, 36(2), 223–270.

Wang, X., & Howell, J. M. (2012). A multilevel study of transformational leadership,
identification, and follower outcomes. The Leadership Quarterly, 23(5), 775–790.

Webster, J., & Starbuck, W. H. (1988). Theory building in industrial and organizational
psychology. In C. L. Cooper, & I. Robertson (Eds.). International review of industrial and
organizational psychology (pp. 93–138). London: Wiley.

Weiss, H. W., & Cropanzano, R. (1996). Affective events theory: A theoretical discussion
of the structure, causes andconsequences of affective experiences at work. Research in
Organizational Behavior, 18, 1–74.

Yukl, G. (1998). Leadership in organizations (4th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-
Hall.

Yukl, G. (1999). An evaluation of conceptual weaknesses in transformational and char-
ismatic leadership theories. The Leadership Quarterly, 10(2), 285–305.

Zhang, A., Tsui, A. S., & Wang, D. X. (2011). Leadership behaviors and group creativity in
Chinese organizations: The role of group processes. The Leadership Quarterly, 22(5),
851–862.

Zhu, W., Chew, I. K. H., & Spangler, W. D. (2005). CEO transformational leadership and
organizational outcomes: The mediating role of human–capital-enhancing human
resource management. The Leadership Quarterly, 16(1), 39–52.

N. Siangchokyoo, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101341

18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0545
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0545
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0545
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0565
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0565
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0565
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0570
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0570
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0575
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0575
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0575
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf5000
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf5000
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf5000
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0580
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0580
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0595
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0595
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30846-4/rf0595


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

The Leadership Quarterly

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua

Review

Functional leadership in interteam contexts: Understanding ‘what’ in the
context of why? where? when? and who?☆

Dorothy R. Cartera,⁎, Kristin L. Cullen-Lesterb, Justin M. Jonesa, Alexandra Gerbasic,
Donna Chrobot-Masond, Eun Young Naeb

a Department of Psychology, The University of Georgia, 125 Baldwin Street, Athens, GA 30602, USA
bDepartment of Management & Leadership, Bauer College of Business, University of Houston, 4750 Calhoun Rd, Houston, TX 77004, USA
c Department of Management, University of Exeter, Streatham Court, Rennes Drive, Exeter EX4 4PU, UK
dDepartment of Psychology, University of Cincinnati, 2600 Clifton Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45221, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords:
Leadership
Boundary spanning
Group social capital
Multiteam systems
Intergroup relations

A B S T R A C T

Research on team leadership has primarily focused on leadership processes targeted within teams, in support of
team objectives. Yet, teams are open systems that interact with other teams to achieve proximal as well as distal
goals. This review clarifies that defining ‘what’ constitutes functionally effective leadership in interteam contexts
requires greater precision with regard to where (within teams, across teams) and why (team goals, system goals)
leadership processes are enacted, as well as greater consideration of when and among whom leadership processes
arise. We begin by synthesizing findings from empirical studies published over the past 30 years that shed light
on questions of what, where, why, when, and who related to interteam leadership and end by providing three
overarching recommendations for how research should proceed in order to provide a more comprehensive
picture of leadership in interteam contexts.

The use of teams1 in organizations is ubiquitous (Mathieu,
Hollenbeck, van Knippenberg, & Ilgen, 2017), and thus, a primary
function of organizational leadership is to facilitate team success
(Kozlowski, Mak, & Chao, 2016; Morgeson, DeRue, & Karam, 2010).
Prior research on team leadership has focused primarily on identifying
functional (i.e., effective; McGrath, 1962) leadership processes and
relationships within teams without considering the larger systems
within which teams are embedded (c.f. Hogg, van Knippenberg, & Rast,
2012). However, no team is a ‘self-sufficient island’—teams must in-
teract with and receive resources from their embedding environments
in order to succeed (Ancona, 1990; Arrow, McGrath, & Berdahl, 2000;
Kozlowski & Klein, 2000). Indeed, formal as well as informal team
leaders often engage in boundary management activities to support
their teams, such as acquiring external resources, promoting team

interests, or interpreting the embedding environment (Ancona, 1990;
Roby, 1961; Yukl, 2012; Zaccaro, Rittman, & Marks, 2001), and lea-
dership is also needed to influence collaborative efforts across inter-
dependent systems comprised of multiple teams pursuing shared goals
(Carter & DeChurch, 2014; Ernst & Chrobot-Mason, 2011, a; Ernst &
Chrobot-Mason, 2011, b; Mathieu, Marks, & Zaccaro, 2001; Pittinsky &
Simon, 2007; Zaccaro, Marks, & DeChurch, 2012).

Despite many calls for researchers to adopt an ‘external’ perspective
to the study of team leadership by conceptualizing teams as “open
systems entailing complex interactions with people beyond their bor-
ders” (Ancona, 1990, p. 335), research on leadership in interteam con-
texts is relatively rare. For instance, studies based on the leadership
theories that have received the most research attention in recent dec-
ades (i.e., Transformational Leadership Theory and Leader-Member

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101378
Received 16 November 2018; Received in revised form 22 December 2019; Accepted 23 December 2019

☆ Authors’ note: The development of this paper was supported in part by funding from the National Science Foundation (SES, #1853470, #1853404), the National
Institutes of Health (NIH, #UL1TR002378), and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA, #80NSSC18K0511). We would like to thank Kristen
Campbell for her assistance with identifying articles that were considered for inclusion in earlier versions of this paper.

⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: dcarter3@uga.edu (D.R. Carter), klcullen-lester@bauer.uh.edu (K.L. Cullen-Lester), justin.jones@uga.edu (J.M. Jones),

gerbasi@exeter.ac.uk (A. Gerbasi), donna.chrobot-mason@uc.edu (D. Chrobot-Mason), enae@bauer.uh.edu (E.Y. Nae).
1 In this paper, the term “teams” is used interchangeably with the term “groups”. We acknowledge that there are often important distinctions between teams and

groups in terms of the level of internal interdependence among members and the differentiation of members' tasks (Kozlowski & Ilgen, 2006). However, in the context
of organizations, the similarities between teams and work groups are more relevant to the content discussed (i.e., members of both work groups and teams interact,
pursue shared goals, see each other as members of the same collective, and are seen by others as members of the same collective; Ancona, 1990).

The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378

Available online 14 January 2020
1048-9843/ © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

T

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/10489843
https://www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101378
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101378
mailto:dcarter3@uga.edu
mailto:klcullen-lester@bauer.uh.edu
mailto:justin.jones@uga.edu
mailto:gerbasi@exeter.ac.uk
mailto:donna.chrobot-mason@uc.edu
mailto:enae@bauer.uh.edu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101378
http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101378&domain=pdf


Exchange Theory [LMX]; c.f. Dinh et al., 2014), typically investigate the
role of intragroup leadership processes and relationships for individuals
and small groups. These studies seldom consider how the multilayered
interdependencies inherent to interteam situations (i.e., inter-
dependencies within as well as between teams; Kirkman & Harris,
2017) coupled with differences in the priorities, identities, and cap-
abilities of different teams need to be managed in order to minimize
intergroup conflict and maximize positive outcomes for specific teams
and the larger systems they operate within.

The relative lack of research attention paid toward leadership in
interteam contexts is unfortunate given that such contexts present
serious challenges and tensions for leaders that go beyond the demands
of leadership within isolated teams. For instance, leaders operating in
interteam contexts often face trade-offs and competing demands and
may choose to promote intrateam relations and team goals at the ex-
pense of interteam relations and system goals, or vice versa (Pittinsky &
Simon, 2007). Interteam contexts may also require that leaders facil-
itate appropriate patterns of interactions between interdependent teams
(Cummings & Kiesler, 2005; Luciano, DeChurch, & Mathieu, 2018)
while avoiding ‘over collaboration’ between teams which can result in
inefficiencies, role overload and decreased motivation (Cross, Rebele, &
Grant, 2016; Davison, Hollenbeck, Barnes, Sleesman, & Ilgen, 2012;
Marrone, Tesluk, & Carson, 2007). These tensions are not captured
adequately by models of team leadership that focus primarily on lea-
dership processes targeted within teams in support of team-level ob-
jectives.

We propose that defining ‘functional’ leadership becomes more
complex when researchers shift from studying leadership within iso-
lated teams to studying leadership in interteam contexts where teams
are embedded in larger interdependent systems. As Fig. 1 illustrates,
defining functional leadership in interteam contexts not only involves
clarifying ‘what’ leaders are, or should be, doing (e.g., enacting specific
leadership behaviors, facilitating certain processes, relationships, and
shared psychological states), ‘who’ is leading (e.g., formal leaders,
formal leadership teams, informal leaders) and ‘when’ (i.e., under
which circumstances), the multi-level nature of interteam contexts also
demands more consideration of ‘where’ leadership processes are tar-
geted (e.g., within teams, across team boundaries) and ‘why’ (e.g., to
support team outcomes, to support system outcomes).

Using this framework to guide our review, we evaluate the degree to
which empirical studies of leadership and/or the targets of leadership
(e.g., interaction processes; psychological states) published over the
past 30 years have addressed questions of why, where, what, who, and
when related to leadership in interteam contexts. Although most lea-
dership studies have taken an ‘internal’ perspective, several burgeoning
streams of research in areas such as group boundary spanning (e.g.,
Ancona & Caldwell, 1990; Tushman & Scanlan, 1981), group social ca-
pital (e.g., Oh, Chung, & Labianca, 2004), boundary spanning leadership
(e.g., Benoliel & Somech, 2015), intergroup leadership (Pittinsky &
Simon, 2007), and multiteam systems (e.g., Mathieu et al., 2001; Zaccaro
et al., 2012) are heeding calls to incorporate an external perspective by

investigating leadership processes targeted across team boundaries.
Indeed, our review reveals that researchers have provided many in-
sightful answers to the five questions in Fig. 1.

However, we also identified a number of limitations, assumptions,
and divisions which pervade the extant literature on leadership in in-
terteam contexts. Prior research has tended to progress in divergent
directions, as evidenced by researchers' use of different terminology
(e.g., intergroup leadership; Pittinsky, 2009; multiteam leadership; Zaccaro
& DeChurch, 2012), examination of different types of interteam inter-
actions (e.g., ambassadorial activities; (Ancona & Caldwell, 1992, b,
1992, a); interteam coordination; Davison, Hollenbeck, Barnes,
Sleesman, & Ilgen, 2012), and focus on objectives at different collective
levels of observation (e.g., team-level; Marrone, Tesluk, & Carson, 2007;
system-level; DeChurch & Marks, 2006). Studies within disparate re-
search streams are revealing different pieces of the larger puzzle of
functional leadership in interteam contexts. Our review aims to bring
these puzzle pieces together in order to provide a more comprehensive
understanding of this important phenomenon. In closing, we offer three
recommendations for how future integrative research might provide
greater insight into how leaders (formal and informal) can navigate the
tensions of interteam contexts and promote the success of both teams
and the broader organizational systems teams operate within.

Review approach

The purpose of this review is to clarify the nature of functional
leadership in interteam contexts, integrate and critically evaluate re-
levant findings from prior research, and identify promising areas for
future inquiry. Broadly, leadership is defined as a “process of influen-
cing others to understand and agree about what needs to be done and
how to do it, and the process of facilitating individual and collective
efforts to accomplish shared objectives” (Yukl, 2006, p. 8). Thus, lea-
dership processes are situated in relation to specific individuals and/or
collectives (where is leadership targeted?) and are enacted to facilitate
specific objectives (why is leadership enacted?). As we depict in Fig. 2,
these two questions of where and why are useful for organizing studies
of leadership processes in intergroup contexts into four categories.

As shown in the first quadrant (Category 1) of Fig. 2, leadership
processes might be targeted within teams (i.e., directly in relation to
team members) in support of team-level objectives (e.g., team perfor-
mance, viability, innovation). The vast majority of empirical studies of
leadership fall within Category 1. Examples include studies of team
leaders supporting team learning and adaptation (Edmondson, 1999;
Kozlowski, Gully, McHugh, Salas, & Cannon-Bowers, 1996; Wageman,
2001), shared team leadership and team performance (Zhu, Liao, Yam,
& Johnson, 2018), the effects of transformational leaders on the effec-
tiveness of individuals and teams (Jung, Yammarino, & Lee, 2009), and
the dynamic delegation of leadership responsibility within teams
(Klein, Ziegert, Knight, & Xiao, 2006).

However, leadership processes targeted across team boundaries in
support of team-level objectives (Category 2) as well as leadership

Where is leadership targeted?

Leadership Within 
Teams

System 
Outcomes 

Team 
Outcomes  

Processes and States 
across Teams

What processes and states targeted? Why (for what purpose)?

When (under what circumstances) 
does leadership occur?

Who is leading?

Leadership Across 
Team Boundaries

Processes and States 
within Teams

Interaction Processes and Emergent States semoctuOsessecorPpihsredaeL

Fig. 1. Multi-level view of functional leadership in interdependent systems.

D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378

2



processes targeted within (Category 3) and across (Category 4) team
boundaries in support of system-level objectives are also critical to or-
ganizational success. Many scholars have emphasized that ‘external’ or
‘cross-boundary’ leadership behaviors that connect teams to entities and
resources in their embedding environments represent a critical category
of functional leadership behaviors for teams ((Ancona & Caldwell,
1988, 1990); Balkundi & Harrison, 2006; Choi, 2002; Contractor,
DeChurch, Carson, Carter, & Keegan, 2012; Elkins & Keller, 2003;
Marrone, 2010; Oh, Labianca, & Chung, 2006; van Knippenberg, 2003;
Yan & Louis, 1999; Yukl, 2012; Zaccaro et al., 2001). Further, many
important objectives, including patient care (DiazGranados, Dow,
Perry, & Palesis, 2014), disaster response (DeChurch et al., 2011), new
product development (Marks & Luvison, 2012), and military operations
(Davison, Hollenbeck, Barnes, Sleesman, & Ilgen, 2012), represent
distal goals that require leadership processes to guide coordinated ef-
forts within and across multiple teams (Mathieu et al., 2001).

Literature search

We used the 2 × 2 framework shown in Fig. 2 to guide our review of
previous research on leadership in interteam contexts. In recent years,
researchers have summarized studies of leadership processes targeted
within teams in support of team objectives (Category 1) in multiple
well-executed reviews of team leadership (e.g., Kozlowski et al., 2016;
Mathieu et al., 2017; Morgeson et al., 2010) and specific leadership
theories (e.g., LMX; Martin, Guillaume, Thomas, Lee, & Epitropaki,
2016; Transformational Leadership; Banks, McCauley, Gardner, &
Guler, 2016; Wang, Oh, Courtright, & Colbert, 2011; shared leadership
within teams; Zhu et al., 2018). Therefore, we focused our review on
studies falling within one or more of the other three categories shown in
Fig. 2.

The starting point for our literature search was 1990, corresponding
with the appearance of articles calling for researchers to take an ‘ex-
ternal’ perspective to better understand the performance of teams
(Ancona, 1990). To identify articles, we conducted a search across a
variety of relevant online databases (Business Source Complete,
ECONLit, E-Journals, Medline, PsycINFO, and Psychology and Beha-
vioral Sciences Collection via the EBSCOhost research databases) for
articles published between January 1990 and August 2019. We used
this approach in order to ensure that we identified articles from a range
of academic disciplines. We required that articles contain one or more
of the following search terms in the abstract: inter-group or intergroup;
inter-team or interteam; boundary spanning or boundary activity;

multi-team or multiteam; and between team(s). Additionally, we
manually searched the reference sections of key publications (e.g., re-
view articles, meta-analyses, empirical papers with high citation rates)
on the topics of teams, multiteam systems, boundary spanning, and
intergroup relations in order to identify additional articles. We limited
the results of our search to peer-reviewed academic journals published
in English. Our initial search yielded 2617 articles.

In the next step, we removed duplicate articles and conducted a pre-
screening process of the articles' titles and abstracts using the following
inclusion criteria: (1) the research appeared to be an empirical study
(i.e., qualitative/quantitative/mixed-methods); (2) the research in-
vestigated how leaders (formal and/or informal) (a) manage or engage
in interaction processes across group boundaries (excluding the
boundary between employees and customers), (b) affect intergroup
relations, and/or (c) facilitate superordinate (interteam/system-level)
outcomes, and/or the research investigated processes or psychological
states that could be targets of cross-boundary leadership for team goals
(Category 2) or leadership in support of system goals (Categories 3 & 4);
(3) the research was conducted within a workplace context or a la-
boratory simulation of a workplace context; (4) the research focused on
variables at the individual-, team-, and/or system-level of analysis (but
were not studies of entire firms); and (5) the publication outlet's impact
factor was equal to or higher than 1.0 (based on the Journal Citation
Reports, 2018). We chose this impact factor as an inclusion criterion to
ensure that our review drew on studies that are generally representative
of research in the field and met standardized criteria for research
quality. Additionally, we excluded articles that did not consider out-
comes at collective levels of analysis (e.g., studies showing that in-
dividuals who carry out boundary spanning activities gain personal
benefits were excluded if they did not also discuss implications for
collectives; e.g., Burt, 1992). Further, as the focus of this review is on
cross-boundary leadership in the context of work teams, we followed the
precedent of Hogg et al. (2012) and did not consider studies examining
leadership across other demographic or social identity boundaries. This
pre-screening process resulted in 407 articles of which 405 full texts
were retrievable.

During the pre-screening process, we chose to err on the side of
inclusion (based on information provided in the article title and ab-
stract). In the final step of our process, the full text of each article was
reviewed carefully by the authorship team to confirm its relevance to
this review based on the inclusion criteria described previously. This
vetting process resulted in a smaller subset of 160 articles. Table 1
provides a list of the journals and the numbers of articles within each

Where?
smaeT ssorcA smaeT nihtiW

W
hy

? T
ea

m
 O

ut
co

m
es Category 1: Internally-focused 

leadership for the team

Influencing processes and states 

within teams to support

team-level outcomes

Category 2: Cross-boundary leadership 
for the team

Influencing processes and states 

across team boundaries to support 

team-level outcomes
Sy

st
em

 O
ut

co
m

es

Category 3: Internally-focused 
leadership for the system

Influencing processes and states 

within teams to support 

system-level outcomes

Category 4: Cross-boundary leadership 
for the system

Influencing processes and states 

across team boundaries to support

system-level outcomes

Fig. 2. An organizing framework for studies of functional leadership in interteam contexts.
Note. Shaded boxes are the focus of the current review.

D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378

3



journal included in our review. Notably, although many of the articles
in this final list did not reference ‘leadership’ explicitly, they high-
lighted intrateam or interteam processes, states, or other attributes that
are potential targets of leadership in interteam contexts.

Article coding

The first four authors extracted and coded each of the 160 articles to
identify the ways in which each article addressed the core elements of
functional leadership in interteam contexts (why? where? what? when?
and who?). We coded the answers to these five questions into emergent
sets of categories (see Table 2 for category examples). As a quality
check, every article was reviewed by at least two authors, and any in-
consistencies were discussed until consensus was reached. We also
identified characteristics of the research designs used in each study. As
Table 3 summarizes, the majority of articles presented quantitative
research (64%); among these was a predominance of quantitative field
studies (53%), which were predominantly cross-sectional (87%) using
samples of working adults (90%). Studies of leadership (or targets of
leadership) for team goals were more likely to use quantitative (78%)
rather than qualitative methods (12%), studies of leadership for system
goals were more evenly split between quantitative (53%) and qualita-
tive methods (39%). We were encouraged to see studies using experi-
mental designs (still only 10% of the total studies reviewed here) and
mixed method approaches (9%). Additionally, many studies in-
corporated best practices for addressing common-method bias in-
cluding crisscross designs, temporal separation, and/or multi-source
data (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Lee, & Podsakoff, 2003; Podsakoff,
MacKenzie, & Podsakoff, 2012; Podsakoff & Organ, 1986).

Synthesis of research on leadership in interteam contexts

Our review revealed that most empirical studies have answered the
question of ‘why’ leadership is enacted (i.e., for what purpose), by
emphasizing one of two levels of collective objectives: (1) leadership
supports team-level objectives; or (2) leadership supports system-level
objectives, with only a small subset of studies emphasizing both team-
and system-level objectives simultaneously. We used the questions of
‘why’ and ‘where’ leadership occurs (internally-focused or cross-
boundary) in interteam contexts to organize and synthesize findings
from prior research (see online Appendix A2 for key findings from each
of the 160 articles). In the following sections, we clarify how the extant
literature has addressed the remaining three questions needed to un-
derstand ‘functional’ leadership in interteam contexts (what? when? and
who?) for each category.

Category 1: Internally-focused leadership for the team

Although a comprehensive review of empirical studies focused

Table 1
Journal titles and numbers of articles organized by disciplinary area.

Applied Psychology, Management, Human Resource Mgt., Org. Studies (94)
Academy of Mgt. J. (20)
Org. Science (6)
Human Relations (5)
J. of Applied Psych. (5)
J. of Mgt. (5)
J. of Mgt. Studies (5)
Small Group Research (5)
Administrative Science Quarterly (4)
J. of Org. Beh. (4)
Leadership Quarterly (4)
Group & Org. Mgt. (3)
J. of Occupational & Org. Psych. (3)
Mgt. Decision (3)
European J. of Work & Org. Psych. (3)
J. of Business Research (2)
Org. Studies (2)
American J. of Community Psych (1)
Applied Psychology: An Int. Review (1)
British J. of Industrial Relations (1)
British J. of Mgt. (1)
Frontiers in Psych. (1)
Int. J. of Human Resource Mgt. (1)
J. of Mgt. & Org. (1)
J. of Leadership & Org. Studies (1)
J. of Managerial Psych. (1)
J. of Small Business Mgt. (1)
Org. Beh. & Human Decision Processes (1)
Personnel Psychology (1)
Personnel Review (1)
Scandinavian J. of Mgt. (1)
Team Performance Mgt. (1)

Innovation, Mgt. Science, Operations, Strategy & Technology Mgt. (27)
Creativity & Innovation Mgt. (3)
Int. J. of Project Mgt. (3)
J. of Engineering & Technology Mgt. (3)
J. of Product Innovation Mgt. (3)
R & D Mgt. (3)
European J. of Innovation Mgt. (2)
Information & Software Technology (2)
Project Mgt. J. (2)
European J. of Operational Research (1)
Int. J. of Operations & Production Mgt. (1)
J. of High Technology Mgt. Research (1)
J. of Technology Mgt. Research (1)
Research Policy (1)
Technology Analysis & Strategic Mgt. (1)

Health & Medicine (9)
Int. J. of Medical Informatics (2)
J. of Oncology Practice (2)
Health & Social Care in the Community (1)
Health Promotion Int. (1)
Health Services Research (1)
Int. J. of Environmental Research & Public Health (1)
Intensive Care Medicine (1)

Other Disciplines (e.g., Int. Business, Education, Cognition, Information
Systems, Human Factors, Accounting, etc.) (30)

Human Factors (2)
Industrial Marketing Mgt. (2)
J. of Service Research (2)
Accounting Review (1)
ACM Trans. on Mgt. Information Systems (1)
Cognition, Technology & Work (1)
Communication Research (1)
Cross Cultural Mgt. (1)
Educational Administration Quarterly (1)
European J. of Marketing (1)
IEEE Trans. on Software Engineering (1)
Information Systems J. (1)
Int. J. of Business Communication (1)
J. of Information Technology (1)
J. of Int. Mgt. (1)
J. of Knowledge Mgt. (1)
J. of Mgt. in Engineering (1)
J. of Mgt. Information Systems (1)

Table 1 (continued)

J. of Marketing Mgt. (1)
J. of Public Administration Research & Theory (1)
J. of World Business (1)
Network Science (1)
Public Administration (1)
Public Mgt. Review (1)
Small Business Economics (1)
Social Networks (1)
Sociological Focus (1)

Note: n = 160 articles; Beh. = Behavior; Int. = International; J. = Journal;
Mgt. = Management; Org. = Organizational, Organization;
Psych. = Psychology; Trans. = Transactions.

2 doi: 10.17605/OSF.IO/AHTYF

D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378

4



solely on leadership targeted within teams in support of team objectives
(Category 1) is beyond the scope of this review, we summarize and
draw from Category 1 research in order to make comparisons between
the ways in which researchers have addressed questions of ‘what,’
‘when,’ and ‘who’ in Category 1 versus the other categories.

What? Identifying leadership processes targeted within groups has
been a primary focus of leadership research for nearly a century. These
studies typically leverage a functional perspective, arguing that team
leadership is ‘effective’ if it ensures that all functions critical to task
accomplishment and team maintenance are addressed (Fleishman et al.,
1991; Hackman & Walton, 1986; McGrath, 1962; Mumford, Zaccaro,
Harding, Jacobs, & Fleishman, 2000).

Early influential studies organized leadership behaviors within
groups into two broad categories: task-oriented behaviors such as plan-
ning, defining and clarifying objectives, problem-solving, and mon-
itoring goal progress; and person-oriented behaviors such as showing
concern for followers and expressing confidence in followers' abilities

(e.g., Katz, Maccoby, Gurin, & Floor, 1951; Stogdill, 1948, 1974;
Stogdill & Coons, 1957). Additionally, with the rise of theories such as
Charismatic Leadership (House, 1977; Weber, 1947), researchers began
to emphasize change-oriented leadership behaviors (Yukl, 2012), which
are aimed at spurring and/or inspiring change within organizations.

The core idea that effective leadership within groups involves task-,
person-, and change-oriented behaviors has continued to pervade more
recent theories of leadership, such as Transformational/Transactional
leadership theory (e.g., Bass, 1985, 1990; Bass & Avolio, 1993, 1994);
Servant Leadership theory (Greenleaf, 1970, 1977); and relational
theories, including LMX (Dansereau, Graen, & Haga, 1975; Graen,
1976; Graen & Cashman, 1975). For example, person- and change-or-
iented behaviors are central to a transformational leadership style (e.g.,
providing individualized consideration; articulating an inspiring vision
for the future; Bass, 1985). Servant leaders are thought to engage in
both person-oriented behaviors (e.g., demonstrate empathy, develop
and empower followers) and task-oriented behaviors (e.g., problem-

Table 2
Five core questions specifying the nature of functional leadership in intergroup contexts.

Core questions Exemplar answers derived from extant literature

1. Why is leadership enacted?
(i.e., for what objective(s)?)

Team goals without mention of interteam interdependence (Ferguson, Ormiston, & Wong, 2019; Keller, 2001); team goals
in intergroup competitions or coopetitions (Bullinger, Neyer, Rass, & Moeslein, 2010; Carbonell & Rodríguez Escudero,
2019; van Bunderen, Greer, & van Knippenberg, 2018); team goals in collaborative interteam contexts (Brion, Chauvet,
Chollet, & Mothe, 2012; Cha, Kim, Lee, & Bachrach, 2015; Drach-Zahavy, 2011; Grippa et al., 2018; Somech & Khalaili,
2014; Tasselli & Caimo, 2019); system goals (Curnin, Owen, & Trist, 2014; Millikin, Hom, & Manz, 2010; Schotter &
Beamish, 2011; Zolper, Beimborn, & Weitzel, 2013); both team and system goals (Friedman & Podolny, 1992; Lee &
Sawang, 2016; Lanaj, Hollenbeck, Ilgen, Barnes, & Harmon, 2013; Susskind, Odom-Reed, & Viccari, 2011)

2. Where is leadership targeted? Within teams (Birkinshaw, Ambos, & Bouquet, 2017; Tippmann, Scott, & Parker, 2017; Zhang, Wu, & Henke, 2015);
across team boundaries (Cuijpers, Uitdewilligen, & Guenter, 2016; Kratzer, Gemünden, & Lettl, 2008; Uitdewilligen &
Waller, 2018)

3. What processes and states are targeted by
leadership?

Communication (Bearman, Paletz, Orasanu, & Thomas, 2010), collaboration (Beck & Plowman, 2013), learning (Chan,
Pearson, & Entrekin, 2003), coordination (Newell & Swan), identity (Gray, Bunderson, Boumgarden, & Bechara, 2019),
cohesion (Ferguson & Blackman, 2019), trust (Chen & Wang, 2008)

4. When is leadership occurring?
(i.e., under what circumstances?)

During changes in organizational structure (Birkinshaw, Ambos, & Bouquet, 2017); when performing non-routine tasks
(Chung & Jackson, 2013); while working in complex and dynamic environments (Curnin, Owen, & Trist, 2014; DeChurch
et al., 2011; Gerber et al., 2016; Kellogg, Orlikowski, & Yates, 2006); during initial project phases (Hoegl, Weinkauf, &
Gemuenden, 2014); when new resources are needed (Waldman & Atwater, 1994); given certain levels of interteam
interdependence (Benoliel & Somech, 2015; Glynn, Kazanjian, & Drazin, 2010; Kennedy, Sommer, & Nguyen, 2017;
Litchfield, Karakitapoğlu-Aygün, Gumusluoglu, Carter, & Hirst, 2018; Widmann & Mulder, 2018)

4. Who is leading? Formal team leader (Melo, Cruzes, Kon, & Conradi, 2013); multiple formal leaders of different teams (Gasson, 2005);
formal leadership team (de Vries, Hollenbeck, Davison, Walter, & Van der Vegt, 2016; DeChurch & Marks, 2006); team
members without formal positions of authority (Ingvaldsen & Rolfsen, 2012; Johannessen, McArthur, & Jonassen, 2015;
Marrone, Tesluk, & Carson, 2007)

Table 3
Summary of methodological approaches in reviewed studies.

Team objective(s) emphasized System objective(s) emphasized Overall

No. of studies n = 73 n = 87 n = 160
Analytic approach 12% (9) qualitative methods;

78% (57) quantitative methods;
10% (7) mixed methods

39% (34) qualitative methods;
53% (46) quantitative methods;
8% (7) mixed methods

27% (43) qualitative methods;
64% (103) quantitative methods;
9% (14) mixed methods

Sample 92% (67) working adults;
7% (5) student samples;
1% (1) other

89% (77) working adults;
9% (8) student samples
2% (2) other

90% (144) working adults;
8% (13) student samples;
2% (3) other

Study design 4% (3) experiments;
70% (51) field/quasi-field;
11% (8) case studies;
15% (11) combination

15% (13) experiments;
38% (33) field/quasi-field;
29% (25) case studies;
9% (8) combination of designs;
3% (3) simulations;
3% (3) archival;
2% (2) secondary data

10% (16) experiments;
53% (84) field/quasi-field;
21% (33) case studies;
12% (19) combination of designs;
2% (3) simulations;
2% (3) archival;
1% (2) secondary data

Temporal design* 90% (46) cross-sectional;
10% (5) longitudinal

82% (27) cross-sectional;
18% (6) longitudinal

87% (73) cross-sectional;
13% (12) longitudinal

Common methods bias* 37% (19) mention explicitly;
27% (14) addressed through design elements;
14% (7) statistical tests

30% (10) mention explicitly;
21% (7) addressed through design elements;
15% (5) statistical tests

35% (29) mention explicitly;
25% (21) addressed through design elements;
14% (12) statistical tests

Endogeneity* 6% (3) mention explicitly;
2% (1) statistical tests

3% (1) mention explicitly;
3% (1) statistical tests

5% (4) mention explicitly;
2% (2) statistical tests

Note. * indicates calculations based on quantitative field studies.

D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378

5



solving, decision-making) guided by a deep understanding of the or-
ganization's mission (Liden, Panaccio, Hu, & Meuser, 2014). Graen &
Uhl-Bien, 1995 argue that leaders should nurture high-quality LMX
relationships with followers characterized by trust, liking, and respect
and offer followers opportunities to develop through task-related roles
and responsibilities. Moreover, less effective leadership styles, such as
Laissez Faire leadership (Bass & Avolio, 1993) or Abusive Supervision
(Mackey, Frieder, Brees, & Martinko, 2017; Tepper, 2000, 2007) are
often depicted as the absence and/or opposite of task-, person-, and/or
change-oriented leadership behaviors (e.g., a lack of structure; hostile
rather than positive relationships).

Within teams, research suggests that task-oriented leadership be-
haviors can initiate structure for the team by (for example) clarifying
team task requirements, establishing reward contingencies, specifying
procedures, and providing feedback on task progress. Both task- and
person-oriented leadership can help team members work effectively by
facilitating the interpersonal interactions, cognitive architectures,
feelings, and attitudes associated with effective teamwork (Burke et al.,
2006). Research on teams has also emphasized the importance of
change-oriented leader behaviors that support team innovation, crea-
tive performance (Gil et al., 2005; Spreitzer, De Janasz, & Quinn, 1999),
and processes of collective transformation and learning (Kozlowski
et al., 1996). For instance, leaders who leverage after-action reviews
(Villado & Arthur Jr, 2013), establish a psychologically safe team cli-
mate (Edmondson, 1999), and/or facilitate a shared understanding of
the task and team environment (e.g., through various task-oriented and
relational-oriented behaviors), can help teams better recognize and
learn from prior mistakes and prepare for future challenges (Garvin,
Edmondson, & Gino, 2008).

Indeed, meta-analytic evidence has demonstrated that task-,
person-, and change-oriented leadership processes are positively asso-
ciated with a variety of organizational outcomes, including group
performance (Burke et al., 2006; DeRue, Nahrgang, Wellman, &
Humphrey, 2011; Judge, Piccolo, & Ilies, 2004). DeRue et al. (2011)
showed that initiating structure (i.e., an aspect of task-oriented lea-
dership) represented the strongest predictor of group performance
whereas change-oriented behaviors (e.g., transformational leadership)
and person-oriented behaviors (e.g., consideration) accounted for
sizeable but lesser portions of the total variance.

When? Like many other areas of organizational scholarship
(Gardner, Harris, Li, Kirkman, & Mathieu, 2017) as research on lea-
dership within teams has matured, many leadership scholars have
moved beyond simple categorization schemas of ‘what leaders do’ (e.g.,
task-, person-, change-oriented leadership) to specify critical boundary
conditions or moderator variables that determine when leadership be-
haviors and/or relational processes within teams are more or less ef-
fective. For instance, classic theories, including Fiedler's (1967) con-
tingency theory and House's (1971) path-goal theory proposed a variety
of situational factors—both internal (e.g., group structure, task de-
mands, team member attributes, state of relations between leader and
team) as well as external to the team (e.g., turbulence, uncertainty,
leader positional power)—that determine the effectiveness of leader-
ship behaviors within groups. Recent empirical studies in Category 1
have echoed these core ideas by investigating a variety of internal
moderators, including leader attributes (Hu & Judge, 2017), task de-
mands (Farh & Chen, 2018), task interdependence (Aubé & Rousseau,
2005), virtuality (Purvanova & Bono, 2009), and team diversity
(Salazar, Feitosa, & Salas, 2017), and external moderators, such as
environmental uncertainty (Sung & Choi, 2012), organizational norms
(Newell, David, & Chand, 2007), top management support (Hurt,
2016), and national culture (Salk & Brannen, 2000).

Researchers have also begun to emphasize the role of time as a key
determinant of what constitutes ‘functional’ leadership for teams. For
example, Kozlowski et al. (1996) conceptualized leadership as invol-
ving dual roles that can operate simultaneously: “(1) a developmental
role, linked to the process of team evolution, and (2) a task contingent

role that shifts its functional emphasis in response to the dynamics of
team task cycles” (p. 262). Whereas the developmental role involves a
longer-term process through which leaders help team members meld
into a cohesive, culturally unique entity, the task contingent role is a
more dynamic process which involves developing team goals, strate-
gies, and expectations during phases of low intensity or routine task
conditions, and intervening during higher intensity, stressful phases.
Morgeson et al. (2010) connected these ideas with Marks, Mathieu, and
Zaccaro' (2001) argument that teams cycle through repeating phases of
‘transition’ and ‘action’ to identify functional leadership behaviors
corresponding to these two task phases. Morgeson and colleagues argue
that during transition phases, leadership should help compose the team,
define the mission, establish expectations, structure and plan tasks,
train and develop the team, and provide sensemaking and feedback.
During action phases, leadership should monitor the team's progress
toward goals, manage team boundaries, challenge the team, perform
the team task, solve problems, provide resources, encourage team self-
management, and support a positive social climate.

Who? Lastly, the question of ‘who is leading?’ (i.e., claiming and/or
being granted leadership influence; DeRue & Ashford, 2010) has be-
come increasingly relevant as organizations have embraced flatter de-
centralized and team-based work structures (Mathieu et al., 2017)
where informal leaders and leadership processes often operate alongside
or in the absence of formal leaders (Zaccaro, Heinen, & Shuffler, 2009).
Indeed, although most studies of team leadership have focused on the
role, actions, and relationships of formal leaders (e.g., team managers),
researchers often depict leadership as a dynamic and emergent social
process of influence, which can occur up, down, and across the orga-
nizational hierarchy (Carter, DeChurch, Braun, & Contractor, 2015;
Cullen-Lester & Yammarino, 2016; Day, Gronn, & Salas, 2004; Follett,
1924; Hollander & Julian, 1969; Pearce & Conger, 2003). For example,
a growing stream of research argues that there are benefits for teams
who engage in shared forms of leadership – “a dynamic, interactive
influence process among individuals in groups for which the objective is
to lead one another to the achievement of group or organizational goals
or both” (Pearce & Conger, 2003, p. 1). Meta-analyses have found that
shared leadership is positively associated with teamwork processes and
emergent psychological states, and accounts for unique variance in
team performance beyond that accounted for by vertical (formal) lea-
dership (D'Innocenzo, Mathieu, & Kukenberger, 2016; Nicolaides et al.,
2014; Wang, Waldman, & Zhang, 2014).

Recently, several studies have suggested that identifying ‘who’ is
doing ‘what’ ‘when’ (in terms of time) holds the potential to advance the
understanding of functional leadership within teams substantially (e.g.,
Aime et al., 2014; Contractor et al., 2012). For example, Morgeson et al.
(2010) posited that team leadership (during transition and/or action
phases) might originate from formal and/or informal sources who reside
inside or outside the team. Further, they proposed that different sources
of leadership might be better suited to fulfill different leadership
functions depending on the phase (transition/action) of team perfor-
mance. For example, an external/formal leader may be best positioned
to compose and monitor the team, establish expectations and goals,
manage team boundaries, provide resources, and encourage self-man-
agement. In contrast, internal/informal leaders may be best suited to
structure, plan, and perform the team task, solve problems, and support
the social climate. Some activities, like providing feedback can be ef-
fectively fulfilled by all sources of leadership. Although these proposi-
tions have yet to be fully tested, they suggest many interesting lines of
inquiry for future research.

Category 2: Cross-boundary leadership for the team

We identified 73 articles investigating cross-boundary leadership
processes enacted in support of team objectives (Category 2). A subset
of these articles discussed leaders, managers, and/or leadership pro-
cesses explicitly (n = 17 articles). These studies convincingly

D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378

6



demonstrate that (formal) leaders often play an active role in managing
interaction processes and relationships with external entities. However,
the majority of articles (76%) did not invoke the notion of leadership
explicitly, but rather, identified cross-boundary interaction processes,
states, and/or interventions that could be targets of leadership in in-
terteam contexts (and/or enacted by informal leaders). In combination,
Category 2 studies help clarify what cross-boundary leadership pro-
cesses are relevant to team outcomes, point to important boundary
conditions for cross-boundary leadership (when), and begin to identify
the ways in which responsibility for cross-boundary leadership might be
distributed across different people (who).

What? The literature on ‘boundary spanning’ has provided sub-
stantial insight into what ‘external’ team activities might constitute
cross-boundary leadership processes and/or might serve as targets of
leadership in interteam contexts (Ancona, 1990; Joshi, Pandey, & Han,
2009; Marrone, 2010). In particular, Ancona and Caldwell's seminal
program of research (1988; 1990; 1992a; 1992b) identified several
broad categories of external functions that link a group to its external
environment, with the external environment referring to “actors or
other teams residing within or outside of the boundary spanning team's
host organization” (Marrone, 2010, p. 914). Scouting activities—what
Marrone (2010) refers to as ‘information search’—include collecting
information and resources from relevant outside parties, constructing a
mental model of the external environment (e.g., who does/does not
support the team), and seeking feedback from members of other groups.
Ambassadorial activities (or ‘representational activities’ in Marrone, 2010)
reflect attempts to: open up lines of communication with other groups
(even without a specific purpose), inform others about the team's pro-
gress, negotiate and coordinate details of intergroup interactions (e.g.,
establishing give-and-take in intergroup exchanges), advocate for team
needs (e.g., to those with greater power), and influence or ‘mold’ the
external environment to suit the team's agenda. Guarding or sentry ac-
tivities involve managing (e.g., delaying, delivering, denying) the flow
of information and resources from the group to external entities and
protecting the team's boundary by selectively allowing information to
enter the team. Lastly, task coordinator activities involve synchronizing
work efforts with other teams and monitoring joint progress and
strategy toward the accomplishment of shared goals.

Although researchers have referred to external team activities in
different ways and have offered different categorization schemes (e.g.,
compare Faraj & Yan, 2009; Somech & Khalaili, 2014; Marrone, 2010;
Joshi et al., 2009; Ancona & Caldwell, 1998, 1992a), there is a clear
consensus across prior research about the relevance of external activities
for team outcomes ((Ancona & Caldwell, 1992, b, 1992, a); Marrone,
2010). External activities can have direct effects on team outcomes by
acting as conduits for information and resources that enable effective-
ness and innovation (Ancona, 1993; (Ancona & Caldwell, 1992, b,
1992, a); Choi, 2002; Marrone, 2010). For example, many studies have
demonstrated positive relationships between external activities that
support the acquisition of information, expertise, and resources with
outcomes such as team creativity and innovation (e.g., Anderson &
Kragh, 2015; Büchel, Nieminen, Armbruster-Domeyer, & Denison,
2013; Tippmann, Scott, & Parker, 2017). External activities can also
have indirect effects on team outcomes by impacting processes and
psychological states within teams (see Fig. 1). For instance, Henttonen,
Johanson, & Janhonen, 2014 found that team identity strength med-
iates the relationships between both bonding (i.e., within teams) and
bridging (i.e., with external entities) social network ties and team
performance. They argue that whereas bonding ties support team
identity by enabling similar attitudes and perceptions (and hence
liking) within teams, bridging ties support team identity by offering
team members information about ‘outgroups’ and thereby afford more
elaborated intergroup social comparisons.

Notably, cross-boundary processes are not always beneficial for all
team outcomes. For example, Ancona, (1990) distinguished different
‘types’ of teams based on the degree to which they leveraged cross-

boundary processes. ‘Informing’ teams remained isolated until they
were ready to inform outsiders of their progress; ‘parading’ teams em-
phasized team building and achieving visibility while passively obser-
ving other teams; and ‘probing’ teams actively engaged outsiders, re-
vised their knowledge through external contacts, initiated programs
with outsiders, and promoted their teams' achievements within their
organizations. Although ‘probing’ teams were rated as the highest
performers, these teams also suffered short-term decrements in member
satisfaction and team cohesion. Other studies have shown that cross-
boundary processes can have negative implications for team perfor-
mance. For instance, in a study of the communication networks of 31
interdisciplinary hospital teams, Grippa et al., 2018 found that more
effective teams were more inwardly focused and less connected to
outside members as compared to less effective teams. Similarly, a study
of inter-university project teams found that the degree to which team
leaders and team members bridged structural holes (i.e., connected
disconnected others; Burt, 1992) was negatively associated with team
performance (Susskind, Odom-Reed, & Viccari, 2011). Indeed, pro-
moting an external focus and encouraging team members to engage in
cross-boundary processes may deplete limited resources (Choi, 2002),
distract attention from critical internal processes, and ultimately di-
minish the cohesiveness of the team (Oh et al., 2006).

In fact, there is growing consensus that there are trade-offs inherent
to cross-boundary processes for teams, and thus, functional leadership
involves helping teams strike an appropriate balance of internal and
cross-boundary interactions and team permeability. On the one hand,
when team boundaries are highly permeable, team cohesiveness and
coordination are likely to suffer. Effective team functioning may depend
on members differentiating themselves as a coherent unit, separate
from the broader environment, by establishing a workspace, rules for
operating, and goals specific to the team (Choi, 2002; Sundstrom,
DeMeuse, & Futrell, 1990). Actions by leaders that reinforce team
boundaries and affirm teams' unique identities can decrease the like-
lihood that members will experience identity threat when they interact
with other teams (Connaughton, Williams, & Shuffler, 2012; Ernst &
Chrobot-Mason, 2011, a; Hogg et al., 2012). On the other hand, if team
boundaries are not sufficiently permeable, teams can experience isola-
tion and may not benefit from the knowledge and expertise of other
teams. For instance, several studies we reviewed referenced the ‘not-
invented-here’ syndrome (Katz & Allen, 1982), which refers to a ten-
dency for teams who have had success in the past to become insular,
believe they have a monopoly on the field, and thus, reject new ideas
and influence from outside sources. The not-invented-here syndrome
can be a major barrier to the inflow of new knowledge and thus, can
stifle continued team learning and creative performance (Chen & Wang,
2008). Therefore, leadership is needed to manage the permeability of
team boundaries by both protecting and insulating teams from negative
outside influences and additionally, by allowing resources and in-
formation to flow both into and out of the team as required by team
task demands (e.g., Benoliel & Somech, 2015).

Indeed, the extant literature emphasizes that leaders and leadership
processes play a primary role in managing (or enacting) external team
activities. Leaders can support their teams by assuming responsibility
for external activities. In this case, the external activities constitute
‘external’ or ‘cross-boundary’ leadership processes. For example,
Takanashi & Lee, 2019 found that leaders of research and development
(R&D) teams who engaged in boundary spanning behaviors were better
able to mobilize external resources and enable their teams to achieve
greater commercial success. The importance of leaders' participation in
external activities is further supported by meta-analytic evidence
showing that higher performing teams tend to have leaders who are
well-connected in social networks, both internal and external to the
team (Balkundi & Harrison, 2006) and studies showing that projects led
by formal leaders who actively engage in external project championing
receive more support from the organization and are more successful
(Markham, Green, & Basu, 1991; Waldman & Atwater, 1994). Evidence

D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378

7



also suggests that leaders who have strong network ties can gather
political support and scan for ideas, and team leaders with many
structural holes in their networks (i.e., indicating brokerage between
contacts who are not connected to one another; Burt, 1992) tend to be
better able to protect their teams from outside interference (Brion,
Chauvet, Chollet, & Mothe, 2012).

Leadership processes can also help set up conditions within teams
that facilitate connections between team members and outsiders.
Research shows that leaders influence the strategies teams use to in-
teract with their environments, and in turn, differences in teams' stra-
tegies help explain outcomes such as team performance and team
member satisfaction (Ancona, 1990). Edmondson, 2003 showed that
effective team leaders not only use their positional status to reach out to
other high-status individuals in the organization (i.e., span the team
boundary), they also encourage team members to engage in boundary-
spanning behaviors themselves by signaling the desirability of an ex-
ternal focus. Research has also shown that empowering (Chuang,
Jackson, & Jiang, 2016) and charismatic (Knipfer, Schreiner, Schmid, &
Peus, 2018) leadership behaviors within teams are linked to team ex-
ternal knowledge acquisition and the overall amount of team boundary-
spanning behavior, respectively. Similarly, Cha, Kim, Lee, & Bachrach,
2015 showed that teams with transformational leaders had higher in-
ternal teamwork quality and were perceived as more collaborative by
members of other teams, suggesting cross-boundary processes may be
smoother for teams with transformational leaders.

Researchers have also identified a number of interventions leaders
might use to increase teams' engagement in cross-boundary processes.
For example, Chuang, Jackson, & Jiang, 2016 examined the effect of
human resource management (HRM) systems in a sample of R&D
teams. They find that when HRM systems support knowledge intensive
teamwork, R&D teams have higher levels of external knowledge ac-
quisition and internal knowledge sharing, and these effects are stron-
gest when knowledge is less tacit and in the absence of ‘empowering’
leaders. Foss & Rodgers, 2011 showed that assigning managers to cross-
unit initiatives was associated positively with their ability to use new
information from other units. Further, studies in Category 2 have
identified attributes at both individual- and team-levels that might be
targets of leadership influence, such as individuals' task experience
(Dahl & Pedersen, 2005), depth of functional expertise (de Vries,
Walter, Van der Vegt, & Essens, 2014), and focus on goals with a ‘global
impact’ (Pedersen, Soda, & Stea, 2019), and teams' functional diversity
(Ancona & Caldwell, 1992, a), interdependence (Benoliel & Somech,
2015) and climate (Shin, Kim, & Hur, 2019).

When? With the awareness that cross-boundary processes can have
positive, negative, null, and/or mixed effects on team outcomes, re-
searchers are seeking to better understand the boundary-conditions or
moderators that determine when cross-boundary interactions are most
beneficial for teams. Paralleling research on leadership within teams
(Category 1) studies in Category 2 have suggested that aspects of both
the internal team environment and the broader embedding environment
can determine the effectiveness of cross-boundary processes for teams.
These studies are beginning to uncover how leaders might ‘strike the
right balance’ by capitalizing on the benefits of cross-boundary pro-
cesses for teams while mitigating the costs.

With regard to the internal state of the team, some researchers have
considered how team properties, such as team task demands, or the
levels of task interdependence determine the necessity of cross-
boundary interactions. For example, Chung & Jackson, 2013 found that
the relationship between external work relationships on team perfor-
mance depends on the routineness of the tasks that are performed. When
teams performed higher novelty tasks, the density of both internal and
external networks were predictive of team performance; whereas per-
formance on highly routine tasks did not benefit from dense external
network connections.

The internal psychological state of the team can also determine the
effectiveness of cross-boundary processes. For instance, psychological

properties associated with the ‘not-invented-here’ syndrome can reduce
the effectiveness of cross-boundary processes by leading teams to dis-
count the influence and ideas offered by outsiders. In support of this
argument, Carbonell & Rodríguez Escudero, 2019 found the level of
team cohesion moderated the effect of boundary spanning such that
boundary spanning was less beneficial for highly cohesive teams.
Likewise, Dokko, Kane, & Tortoriello, 2014 showed that R&D teams
with strong team identification are less able to recombine knowledge
from the external environment and generate creative ideas. In contrast,
strong identification with an overarching superordinate group (e.g., a
division) enhanced team creative generativity. Suggesting that the re-
lationship between internal team psychological states and the benefits
of cross-boundary processes is complex and non-linear, Bullinger,
Neyer, Rass, & Moeslein, 2010 showed that in a competitive environ-
ment, teams with either very high or very low orientations toward co-
operation with other teams (but not moderate) were most innovative.

In contrast to Category 1, very few Category 2 studies have con-
sidered how the timing of cross-boundary processes might impact their
utility. Ancona & Caldwell, 1990 found that ambassadorial activities
appeared to be most relevant during the creation and diffusion phases
of a team project. They suggest that a strategy that works early in the
life of a group may not support positive performance over time. Yet, the
vast majority of studies we reviewed did not consider the types of
temporal elements (e.g., phase of team performance, current task de-
mands, developmental stage, team history) that have been the focus of
recent leadership within teams (e.g., Aime et al., 2014; Kozlowski et al.,
1996; Morgeson et al., 2010).

The nature of a team's external environment can also shape the ef-
fectiveness of cross-boundary processes for teams. For example, Faraj &
Yan, 2009 found that under organizational conditions of high resource
scarcity and task uncertainty, teams engaged in increased boundary
activities—such as spanning, buffering, and reinforcing—in order to
secure resources and develop psychological safety among team mem-
bers. In another socio-structural study, Gleibs & Haslam, 2016 found
that team members' willingness to support a leader's strategy for in-
tergroup relations was dependent upon the current social context (i.e.,
social relations), and the team's status. When social relations were
unstable, low status groups were more likely to support competitive
leaders, but high-status groups were more likely to support cooperative
leaders. Their findings underscore that leader effectiveness is con-
tingent upon the social environment surrounding the team, as this alters
how leaders are perceived internally.

Who? An equally important factor influencing the effectiveness of
cross-boundary leadership may be who is assuming (or is granted) re-
sponsibility for cross-boundary leadership. Empirical research supports
the active role that formal leaders play in cross-boundary leadership by
directly engaging in cross-boundary activities on behalf of their team
(e.g., Ancona, 1990; Liu, Schuler, & Zhang, 2013; Prysor & Henley,
2018). For example, Ancona & Caldwell, 1990 found that leaders en-
gaged more frequently in ambassadorial, scouting, coordinating, and
guarding activities than other members of the team. Further, Hirst &
Mann, 2004 showed that boundary spanning behaviors performed by
formal leaders had a stronger relationship with team performance than
boundary spanning behaviors performed by team members.

However, a number of other studies have suggested benefits of
distributing responsibility for boundary spanning across multiple
members of the team (Ancona et al., 2002; Contractor et al., 2012;
Elkins & Keller, 2003). Marrone, Tesluk, & Carson, 2007 demonstrated
that teams are more effective when more team members are engaged in
boundary spanning. The authors posit that the presence of multiple
boundary spanners may reduce the demands placed on individual team
members, increase the amount of resources brought into the team, re-
duce task uncertainty, and improve team member mental models re-
garding the external environment. Likewise, Ferguson & Blackman,
2019 found that boundary spanning was related to team cohesion and
performance in top management teams and this relationship was

D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378

8



magnified as an increasing number of team members—aside from the
CEO—participated in boundary spanning activities. Currently, how-
ever, both the extent to which formal versus informal leaders should
engage in cross-boundary leadership and the extent to which
‘boundary-spanning’ behaviors reflect the phenomenon of ‘leadership’
remain poorly understood.

The effectiveness of teams' external activities may also depend on
the specific patterns of relationships that leaders (formal/informal) have
with people in the external environment (Balkundi & Harrison, 2006;
Tushman & Scanlan, 1981). For example, Büchel, Nieminen,
Armbruster-Domeyer, & Denison, 2013 found that new product devel-
opment teams were most innovative when team members had trusting
relationships with external ‘project champions,’ and broad (non-
redundant) knowledge relationships. Oh, Chung, & Labianca, 2004
advanced the concept of group social capital in order to explain the
importance of patterns of cross-boundary connections for team perfor-
mance. Their results suggest that groups were most effective when
group members had a moderate level of internal informal socializing
relationships and a large number of ties to the leaders of other teams.
Continuing this line of inquiry may prove invaluable to understanding
the patterns of cross-boundary leadership relationships that promote
team functioning.

Categories 3 and 4: Iinternally-focused and cross-boundary leadership for
the system

In contrast to most studies within Category 1, studies of leadership
in support of system goals rarely investigated and/or theorized about
leadership (or targets of leadership) processes targeted within teams
(Category 3) without also considering how these processes impact cross-
boundary processes or states (Category 4). Therefore, reflecting the
literature, we present findings from Categories 3 and 4 within a single
section. We identified 86 articles that emphasized the achievement of
superordinate system-level objectives requiring interdependent interac-
tions across multiple teams. Thirty of these articles (35%) discussed
leaders or leadership processes explicitly, and a small subset (n = 7
articles) evaluated both team- and system-level objectives simulta-
neously. Scholars have long recognized the importance of collaboration
across multiple groups (e.g., teams, organizational units) for organiza-
tional success (Blake, Shepard, & Mouton, 1964; Brett & Rognes, 1986;
Thompson, 1967). However, the majority (72%) of the studies we
identified that focused on system-level objectives were published
during the last decade, suggesting an increasing interest in the drivers
and outcomes of interteam collaboration in interdependent systems.

What? Three separate, but conceptually related, areas of research
have emerged over the past two decades which clarify what leaders and
leadership processes need to accomplish in order to support super-
ordinate goals. The first two areas, which we refer to as ‘intergroup
leadership’ research (Hogg et al., 2012; Pittinsky, 2009; Pittinsky &
Simon, 2007) and ‘boundary spanning leadership’ research (Ernst &
Chrobot-Mason, 2011, a), respectively, have origins within social psy-
chological theories of intergroup relations (Tajfel & Turner, 1979;
Turner, 1985). These two domains focus explicitly on leaders and lea-
dership processes in intergroup contexts and highlight the psycholo-
gical challenges leaders are likely to face when leading multiple dif-
ferentiated groups (e.g., identity threat, anxieties, misaligned goals,
questions regarding the leaders' priorities and loyalties). The third area,
‘multiteam system functioning’ (Mathieu et al., 2001; Shuffler, Jiménez-
Rodŕıguez, & Kramer, 2015; Zaccaro et al., 2012), has its origins within
industrial/organizational psychology and organizational behavior and
draws heavily from theories of team functioning (Hackman & Morris,
1975; McGrath, 1964) and organizational design (e.g., Thompson,
1967). Although leadership is not always the primary focus of multi-
team system research, most multiteam system studies explicitly or im-
plicitly investigate leadership (in the functional sense) as a factor
contributing to system functioning.

Studies of intergroup leadership, boundary spanning leadership,
and multiteam systems all have in common an emphasis on conveying
the difficulties associated with facilitating collaboration in inter-
dependent systems comprised of multiple groups or teams. It is not
uncommon for teams to succeed individually but fail collectively as a
system due to critical misalignment and collaboration problems be-
tween teams (Marks, DeChurch, Mathieu, Panzer, & Alonso, 2005).
Indeed, numerous studies began by highlighting interteam collabora-
tion challenges. One recurring theme reflects the challenges associated
with collaboration across teams with very different characteristics (e.g.,
geographic locations, norms, goals, priorities, areas of expertise;
Luciano et al., 2018). For example, Alter, 1990 found that functional
differentiation between teams in an interorganizational service delivery
context created conflict and inhibited coordination. Likewise, Gerber
et al., 2016 illustrated how clinical research systems struggled to co-
ordinate due to a lack of collective identity, low cohesion, and differing
goals between teams which ultimately bred competition. Similarly, in a
study of university-firm R&D teams, Takanashi & Lee, 2019, found that
teams struggled to overcome differences in culture, goals, and values,
resulting in tensions that constructed barriers to collaboration.

Many studies also highlighted collaboration difficulties associated
with change either within the system or external to the system. For
example, in a study of multi-agency emergency management systems,
Curnin, Owen, & Trist, 2014 described how dynamics inherent to the
operating environment placed demands on teams to share information
and make decisions quickly, hindering collaboration. Problems asso-
ciated with dynamism have also been observed during crisis response as
emergency medical services and emergency department teams must
coordinate their efforts in a rapidly changing environment. Accord-
ingly, Reddy et al., 2009 highlight how environmental dynamism in
emergency response can make it difficult for geographically distributed
teams to provide context during their between-team communications,
negatively impacting system-wide collaboration. Likewise, Taneva,
Grote, Easty, & Plattner, 2010, found that one of the most common
causes of breakdowns in perioperative patient care was interteam co-
ordination failures stemming from rapidly changing environments.

Luciano et al. (2018) theorize that the reason why differences be-
tween teams and excessive dynamism (e.g., uncertainty, fluidity,
change) make interteam collaboration challenging is that these forces
enhance the boundaries between teams and cause disruptions for
system functioning. In turn, strong team boundaries and system dis-
ruptions can lead constituent members to orient their interactions to-
ward fellow teammates and away from members of other teams, thus
limiting the development of the interteam behavioral processes (e.g.,
coordination) and affective/motivational and cognitive psychological
states (e.g., psychological safety, shared mental models) needed to
achieve shared goals. However, as Luciano et al. emphasize, “this is not
to suggest that low differentiation is the solution” (p. 1087). The dif-
ferences between teams and the dynamic nature of complex environ-
ments are often the very reason multiteam systems are established in
the first place. Thus, leadership and other boundary-related coordina-
tion mechanisms (i.e., potential targets of leadership) are needed in
order to manage behavioral processes and psychological states within
and across teams. Echoing Luciano and colleagues' argument that dif-
ferences between teams should not be minimized, but instead, should
be encouraged, Lanaj, Foulk, & Hollenbeck, 2018 found that multiteam
systems perform most effectively when lower level component teams
hold different preferences for risk-taking from their formal leadership
teams. When component teams are allowed to hold and express dif-
ferences in opinion from formal leaders the system may be more likely
to learn and evaluate ideas during interteam communication and less
likely to fall prey to ‘groupthink’ (Janis, 1971).

Interteam states and processes as targets of leadership. Paralleling re-
search on leadership within teams in support of team objectives
(Category 1) many of the studies we reviewed in Categories 3 and 4
highlighted behavioral processes and psychological states within, and

D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378

9



especially across, component team boundaries as key targets of lea-
dership influence. For example, a few articles explored how ‘boundary
spanning’ activities, defined broadly, are relevant to system objectives.
Floyd & Wooldridge, 1997 found that middle managers' boundary
spanning was related to their own strategic influence as well as the
performance of the system as a whole. Glaser, Fourné, & Elfring, 2015
highlight how overlapping boundary spanning ties between middle
managers and top management team members facilitates innovation
across a multi-group business unit. Further, in a study of innovation in
science and technology parks, Corsaro, Ramos, Henneberg, & Naudé,
2012 illustrate how boundary spanning drives resource transfer in in-
terorganizational collaboration, supporting innovation.

Several studies emphasized the importance of interteam commu-
nication quality and quantity to system performance. For instance,
Arnett & Wittmann, 2014 found that communication quality was po-
sitively associated with knowledge exchange between groups. Kratzer,
Gemünden, & Lettl, 2008 examined the quantity of informal commu-
nication between teams. Interestingly, they found that there was an
inverted U-shaped relationship between informal interteam commu-
nication and the creativity of multi-team R&D projects. The authors
posit that although frequent interteam communication may lead to
improved transfer of information, extremely high levels of interteam
communication may prove to be a distraction, reducing individual
autonomy and creativity, as well as overall efficiency.

However, the majority of studies in Categories 3 and 4 depict in-
terteam coordination (i.e., synchronization of actions across teams;
Marks, DeChurch, Mathieu, Panzer, & Alonso, 2005) as the most critical
behavioral process associated with system outcomes, particularly
within research on multiteam systems. Moreover, research on multi-
team systems emphasizes that leaders and leadership processes play a
primary role in facilitating interteam coordination. The majority of
studies of leadership in multiteam system contexts have investigated
leadership originating from a formal leadership team (i.e., an ‘integra-
tion’ team) that is situated hierarchically above other component
teams.

For example, DeChurch & Marks, 2006 experimental study showed
that training formal leadership teams on how to develop strategy as
well as monitor and communicate information related to the multiteam
task across teams fostered interteam coordination and system perfor-
mance. Using the same simulation, Murase, Carter, DeChurch, & Marks,
2014, demonstrated that the development of system-wide shared
mental models about interteam coordination is a key mechanism
linking leadership teams' communication about strategy to interteam
coordination and performance. Bick, Spohrer, Hoda, Scheerer, &
Heinzl, 2018 also discuss the importance of shared mental models in
multiteam contexts. The authors found that team processes such as
planning led to mental model convergence and a lack of similar mental
models prohibited effective coordination between teams. Findings from
Firth, Hollenbeck, Miles, Ilgen, & Barnes, 2015 also emphasize the
importance of shared mental models across teams. Their work showed
that frame-of-reference training (i.e., training that reduced incon-
sistencies across teams regarding how shared problems are con-
ceptualized) benefited within-team coordination, between-team co-
ordination and multiteam system performance.

Formal leadership teams (or other formal boundary spanning me-
chanisms) are thought to be particularly critical in multiteam system
contexts given the large size and complex processing demands of these
systems (Davison, Hollenbeck, Barnes, Sleesman, & Ilgen, 2012). In-
deed, Davison and colleagues demonstrated that unbridled coordina-
tion through mutual adjustment (operationalized as attending to the
same element of a simulation at the same time) between lower level
component teams was negatively associated with system performance.
However, mutual adjustment processes between formal boundary
spanners and leadership team members benefited system performance.
Similarly, a study by de Vries, Hollenbeck, Davison, Walter, & Van der
Vegt, 2016 demonstrated that intrapersonal functional diversity (i.e.,

breadth of intraindividual knowledge) facilitates horizontal coordina-
tion but inhibits aspirational behavior. However, this effect is moder-
ated by vertical coordination, such that the negative effects of in-
trapersonal functional diversity are not realized in the presence of
vertical coordination between component teams and the formal lea-
dership team. Lanaj, Hollenbeck, Ilgen, Barnes, & Harmon, 2013 also
found that decentralized planning structures (i.e., where plans are de-
veloped within lower level component teams first before being passed
to the leadership team) had some benefit for system performance at-
tributable to enhanced proactivity and aspiration levels, but also re-
sulted in an overall negative effect attributable to risk taking and co-
ordination failures.

In addition to behavioral processes and shared cognitions, many of
the studies we reviewed emphasized the need for leadership processes
to relieve affective and/or motivational barriers associated with inter-
team collaboration. For example, intergroup leadership theory
(Pittinsky & Simon, 2007) suggests that leaders need to be mindful of
the anxieties group members may experience when working with other
groups and emphasizes that intergroup collaboration can threaten the
distinctiveness of group identities and/or lead group members to feel
that the value of their own group's identity is diminished (Hewstone &
Brown, 1986). Pittinsky and Simon proposed that leaders may improve
intergroup relations by encouraging contact between members of dif-
ferent groups, managing resources and interdependencies to reduce or
prevent competition and conflict, promoting shared ‘superordinate
identities’ as well as ‘dual identities’ to meet members' needs for dis-
tinctiveness and belonging, and fostering positive intergroup attitudes.

Several studies provide support for this idea. Richter, West, van
Dick, & Dawson, 2006 demonstrated that the relationship between
group identity and effective intergroup relations was positive at high
levels of system identification but not at low levels. Likewise,
Gumusluoglu, Karakitapoğlu-Aygün, & Scandura, 2017, found that
benevolent leaders fostered team identification to the benefit of team
innovative behavior, and simultaneously, fostered a cross-team identity
positively influencing interteam innovative behavior. Cuijpers,
Uitdewilligen, & Guenter, 2016 further illustrated that system identity
was more important for multiteam system processes and performance
than team identity. Similarly, Porck et al., 2018 showed that organi-
zational identification supported intergroup strategic consensus
whereas team identification can overpower it. In contrast, Porck et al.,
2019 argued that superordinate identification develops feelings of un-
certainty that deplete team members' cognitive resources. Supporting
their hypotheses they find (using the same laboratory simulation con-
text as several other multiteam system studies; e.g., Davison,
Hollenbeck, Barnes, Sleesman, & Ilgen, 2012; Firth, Hollenbeck, Miles,
Ilgen, & Barnes, 2015; Lanaj, Hollenbeck, Ilgen, Barnes, & Harmon,
2013) that team identification was positively associated with system
performance, whereas system identification was negatively associated
with system performance. Moreover, these effects were stronger under
conditions of high task complexity and weaker under conditions of low
task complexity. These mixed results suggest there are both downsides
as well as upsides to team and system identification and begs the
question of what role leadership should play in helping to balance and/
or alleviate the apparent tensions in order to ensure optimal team and
system functioning.

Hogg et al. (2012) also questioned the benefits of creating a super-
ordinate identity and proposed that intergroup leaders should instead
help groups develop intergroup relational identities (i.e., identities de-
fined by the relationships between one's own team and other teams).
They argue that intergroup relational identities can allow teams to
maintain their distinctiveness, while also promoting effective colla-
boration. Empirical studies have not verified how leaders might facil-
itate the development of intergroup relational identities. However,
theoretical work suggests that leaders can promote these identities
through their rhetoric (e.g., by communicating about what resources the
different teams might bring to and receive from intergroup

D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378

10



interactions), by modeling positive intergroup relations through their
own cross-boundary processes, and by facilitating interactions among
members of different teams (Ernst & Chrobot-Mason, 2011a; Hogg
et al., 2012). By forming positive interpersonal relationships with
members of each group, a leader may role-model desired intergroup
relations and foster intergroup trust. However, leaders also need to be
aware of and manage group members' perceptions of their intergroup
behaviors. On the one hand, leaders may be perceived as less effective
within their own groups if they are seen as being overly supportive of
another group's goals, identity, or status (Hogg et al., 2012). On the
other hand, a leader who exhibits an over-emphasis on activities within
teams can undermine the team's ability to collaborate effectively with
others (Pittinsky & Simon, 2007).

Similarly, Ernst and Chrobot-Mason's work on boundary spanning
leadership (Ernst & Chrobot-Mason, 2011a; 2011b) proposed that lea-
ders can use a series of interrelated strategies to promote collaborative
psychological relationships between groups. The first strategy, ‘mana-
ging boundaries,’ begins within teams and consists of two steps: buf-
fering and reflecting. The goal of buffering is to protect a team from
undue outside influences, affirm the team's identity, and promote a
sense of safety and security among team members. Teams then engage
in reflecting by clarifying their own values, priorities, expertise, roles,
and needs and prepare to share this information with members of other
teams. Ernst and Chrobot-Mason argue that these internally focused
leadership behaviors prepare teams to effectively engage with other
entities within and beyond their organization as collaborative partners
and help team members avoid identity threat. Second, they propose
that it is important to have members of different groups connect on a
personal level (i.e., without a focus on intergroup differences) to foster
interpersonal trust.

In addition to (team, system, and/or intergroup relational) iden-
tities, several studies have identified other affective and motivational
constructs within and across teams that might be targets of leadership
influence in support of superordinate goals. For example, emerging
research highlights the impact of states such as anxiety and psycholo-
gical safety on system effectiveness. Park & DeShon, 2018 for example,
studied how the quality of group discussions influences competition,
fear, and greed between groups. Notably they find that groups who
engaged in structured discussions were more likely to have high quality
discussions, which in turn reduced greed and fear, and decreased the
likelihood of competing with outsiders. In a study of ad hoc multiteam
system aircrews, Bienefeld & Grote, 2014 found that psychological
safety within teams mediated the effects of leader inclusiveness on team
members' speaking up behavior within teams and boundary-spanners'
speaking up across team boundaries. Interestingly, team boundary-
spanners' perceptions of leader inclusiveness and psychological safety
between teams had no effect on speaking up between teams; rather, it
was the boundary spanners' perceptions of within team psychological
safety that mattered most. Fleştea, Curşeu, & Fodor, 2017 also in-
vestigated psychological safety, exploring the influence of power dis-
parity. The authors find that high power disparity positively influences
system performance by engaging team members in a higher level of
information processing, but also has negative effects on performance as
it stifles perceptions of psychological safety and fosters a negative af-
fective climate.

A subset of studies has explored the effects of motivational con-
structs such as goals, priorities, and collective efficacy. In a study of a
semiconductor plant, Millikin, Hom, & Manz, 2010 illustrated that
systems comprised of highly cohesive component teams that engaged in
self-management (i.e., setting goals, focusing on intrinsic rewards, en-
gaging in positive self-talk) were the most productive. In a case study of
the response to the space shuttle Columbia disaster, Beck & Plowman,
2013 found that establishing, communicating, and monitoring shared
superordinate goals was pivotal for the emergence of collaboration
between teams. Goal alignment both within and between teams appears
to be another important motivational factor. For instance, Meth,

Lawless, & Hawryluck, 2009 found that one of the greatest sources of
conflict in intensive care units is the presence of incompatible and/or
inconsistent goals regarding patient care across the various healthcare
teams that comprise the unit, ultimately resulting in reductions in
quality of care. Unfortunately, some research has shown that different
teams are not necessarily aware of the fact that their goals are mis-
aligned. For instance, Power & Alison, 2017 observed that different
agencies in an emergency response system prioritized different goals
(i.e., approach goals vs. avoid goals). Despite the observed goal con-
flicts, however, participants believed that their interagency goals were
aligned with one another (according to their ratings of goal alignment),
suggesting that members of different teams may be unaware of goal
conflicts.

When? Studies in Categories 3 and 4 suggest that many factors can
act as boundary conditions determining the effectiveness of specific
leadership processes within and across teams. These factors may ori-
ginate within teams (e.g., strength of team identification, Gumusluoglu,
Karakitapoğlu-Aygün, & Scandura, 2017), across teams (e.g., level of
interteam interdependence), and in the embedding environment (e.g.,
system dynamism; Uitdewilligen & Waller, 2018).

For instance, several studies have emphasized that the nature of
interteam interdependence can play an influential role for various func-
tions and outcomes both within and across teams. Marks, DeChurch,
Mathieu, Panzer, & Alonso, 2005 showed that interteam processes were
more critical at high levels of interteam interdependence than at lower
levels where teams functioned under greater autonomy. In another
study by Glynn, Kazanjian, & Drazin, 2010, team identification and
team members' perceptions of interteam interdependence interacted to
predict intentions to innovate such that individuals with high team
identification and high interteam interdependence perceptions had
lower intentions to innovate.

Recent work by Kennedy, Sommer, & Nguyen, 2017 utilized com-
putational modeling and virtual experiments to investigate how leaders
facilitate multiteam system communication across differing levels of
team interdependence and project complexity. Their results show that
the level of interdependence between teams influences the frequency
with which leaders must make changes to communication plans in re-
sponse to changing project complexity. Specifically, whereas systems
with low to moderate interteam interdependence may rely on similar
paths of communication for tasks of varying complexity (i.e., e-mail,
video conferencing, sharing information indirectly through leadership),
multiteam systems with high interteam interdependence must adapt
their mix of communication tools depending on task complexity to
prevent communication channels from becoming overburdened.

A number of Studies in Categories 3 and 4 have also begun to ex-
plore how leadership processes need to shift depending on the timing or
phase of task performance. For example, DeChurch & Marks, 2006
evaluated leadership teams' use of strategizing behaviors during tran-
sition phases (e.g., gathering information, establishing roles and re-
sponsibilities, planning), and coordination behaviors during action
phases (e.g., orchestrating actions, adapting roles and responsibilities to
meet changing task demands, managing the flow of information). Other
research has examined the critical role of leader planning during
transition phases (Lanaj, Hollenbeck, Ilgen, Barnes, & Harmon, 2013)
and the importance of effective team boundary management, especially
in the early conceptual phases of a collaborative project to prevent
teams from falling behind schedule (Hoegl & Weinkauf, 2005).

Further, Park & DeShon, 2018 found that discussion leaders who
advocate for cooperation between teams are better able to influence
team members early in the formation of a group when members are
receptive to normative power. However, over time, high-quality in-
ternal discussions were more important for decreasing team members'
feelings of greed and fear, and therefore their desire to compete with
outsiders. In another recent study Quiroz, Brunson, & Bigras, 2017
present an in-depth case study of the dynamic processes of mutual
adjustment that occurred between two professional teams participating

D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378

11



in a multicomponent community-based intervention (CBI). During the
initial stages of collaboration, mutual adjustment involved division of
roles and responsibilities based on areas of expertise, withdrawal from
partner's area of expertise, and a relative paucity of direct interaction
between groups. Interestingly, after a shock to the system, these rules
transformed. Rather than dividing work based on expertise, the teams
worked together directly to find a solution; new links were created to
enhance intergroup communication; and groups came to function with
a coherent joint approach to intervention. In combination, these studies
exemplify the growing acknowledgement that the timing of leadership
is a critical determinant of leadership effectiveness.

Who? A few studies have begun to illustrate the potential im-
portance of informal leadership influence processes in the context of
superordinate goals. For example, Kratzer, Gemünden, & Lettl, 2008
study of multi-team R&D projects found that there are benefits to a
moderate overlap in formal and informal communication structures. A
case study of subsea operations in the oil industry, found that when
formal leaders were inaccessible, individual team members would re-
spond by performing leadership functions without explicit delegation
by the formal leader (Johannessen, McArthur, & Jonassen, 2015).
Whereas another a case study found that formal and informal leader-
ship structures were put in place both within and between teams to
ensure the success of school reform in complex environments, which
require cross-sector collaboration and leadership structures that
leverage the expertise of the functional groups (Malin & Hackmann,
2019). These studies illustrate the often-complementary relationship
between formal and informal leadership.

However, informal leadership processes are not always effective in
the context of system goals. For instance, supporting the implementa-
tion of a formal leadership team (Davison, Hollenbeck, Barnes,
Sleesman, & Ilgen, 2012), Ingvaldsen & Rolfsen, 2012 examined how
shared leadership and rotating group spokespersons can be used as al-
ternatives to hierarchical control in autonomous work groups using a
qualitative case study of a manufacturing firm. They found that the two
alternatives tend to under-perform as they weakened the system's
ability to regulate non-routine situations and evaluate integral pro-
cesses. Their findings underscore the need for further research clar-
ifying why informal leadership emerges, as in some circumstances in-
formal leadership may prove to be detrimental. Another example comes
from Newell & Swan, 2000, who conducted a case study of a multi-
disciplinary research system. They argued that high levels of trust were
necessary to facilitate the levels of communication needed to generate
scientific innovation; however, the system experienced a severe dis-
trust, power struggles, a lack of accountability across sites, and a high
level of ambiguity for lower-level group members. These findings sug-
gest that even in the presence of formal authority structures, power
struggles and informal influence processes might disrupt system func-
tioning.

Three recommendations for advancing integrative research on
leadership in interteam contexts

Our review demonstrates that leadership scholars are increasingly
answering calls (e.g., Ancona, 1990; Hogg et al., 2012; Pittinsky &
Simon, 2007) to adopt an external perspective by examining how team
members and leaders reach beyond team boundaries to support team
outcomes (e.g., Marrone, 2010; Oh, Chung, & Labianca, 2004; Oh,
Labianca, & Chung, 2006) and coordinate with other teams as part of
interdependent systems (e.g., Davison, Hollenbeck, Barnes, Sleesman, &
Ilgen, 2012; DeChurch et al., 2011; DeChurch & Marks, 2006). Re-
searchers have made great strides in terms of clarifying what interac-
tion processes, states, and leadership behaviors comprise ‘functional’
leadership in interteam contexts, as well as why and where leadership is
enacted. However, our review also revealed that research is far from
offering a complete picture of leadership in interteam contexts as stu-
dies have progressed within separate siloed literatures that emphasize

leadership processes needed to support team or system objectives, but
not both. Further, our review identified critical limits to our current
understanding of when certain leadership processes are most appro-
priate and who (i.e., which people) should assume responsibility for
leadership. Therefore, in the following, we build on these limitations to
offer three overarching recommendations for future research that aims
to move the field from collecting pieces of a jumbled puzzle to com-
pleting a coherent picture of leadership in interdependent organiza-
tional systems.

#1 - Clarify how leaders balance ‘what’ across levels of ‘why’ and ‘where’

The studies we reviewed convincingly demonstrate that leadership
processes within and across team boundaries are relevant to the
achievement of both team- and system-level collective goals. However,
the extant literature hints at the idea that the leadership processes that
support team goals might not always support system goals, or vice
versa. For example, whereas the literature on boundary management
emphasizes that leaders enable team success by securing external re-
sources that support team objectives and by protecting the team from
outside demands ((Ancona & Caldwell, 1988, 1992, b); Choi, 2002), the
literature on multiteam systems has argued that leadership processes
need to ensure that all component teams in the system act in pursuit of
shared superordinate goals, regardless of whether teams ‘win’ in-
dividually (Lanaj, Hollenbeck, Ilgen, Barnes, & Harmon, 2013). Ex-
amining team or system success in isolation makes it challenging for
researchers to provide practically relevant guidance for how leadership
can support success across both collective levels. Thus, our first re-
commendation is for future research to integrate across research areas
in order to better clarify how leaders balance the competing demands of
interteam contexts. In order to do so, we propose four key advance-
ments.

First, and most obviously, we believe that it is imperative for studies
of leadership in interdependent systems to measure and theorize about
performance at multiple levels of observation. The failure of most stu-
dies of cross-boundary processes to examine both team and system
outcomes in the same research study is especially problematic given
arguments made repeatedly in studies falling within Categories 2, 3,
and 4 that what is ‘good for the team’ and what is ‘good for the system’
may be at odds with each other. Leaders at all levels in organizations
have to navigate inherent tensions which result from multilevel goal
hierarchies, multilayered goal and task interdependencies (Kirkman &
Harris, 2017), and political and relational dynamics that knit together
organizational systems. It is impossible to evaluate empirically how
leaders balance these competing demands without evaluating outcomes
at multiple collective levels.

Second, we identified many discrepancies across the different ca-
tegories of research in terms of what leadership processes are empha-
sized most often. We suggest that developing a comprehensive under-
standing of how leaders balance the demands of interteam contexts may
require more integration of the ideas about ‘what leaders do’ in these
siloed areas of research. For example, in Category 1, researchers em-
phasize the importance of task-, person- and change-oriented leadership
behaviors for team performance (Burke et al., 2006; DeRue et al., 2011;
Judge et al., 2004). However, examining the behaviors discussed in
Categories 2, 3, and 4, reveals an overwhelming emphasis on task-or-
iented behaviors (e.g., information search/scouting, guarding/sentry,
task coordination, strategy development). The lack of attention toward
person- and change-oriented behaviors is an important oversight as
leveraging person-oriented and change-oriented leadership behaviors
might be imperative in intergroup contexts characterized by competing
priorities. For example, change-oriented leadership behaviors (e.g.,
offering an inspiring vision) might allow the leader of one team to re-
duce his or her own goal conflicts by shifting the goals others prioritize
to better align with his or her own priorities. Studies of leadership in the
context of superordinate goals (Categories 3 and 4) may also benefit

D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378

12



from leveraging more of the nuances of ‘boundary management’ ac-
tivities identified in Category 2. For example, although task coordina-
tion is heavily emphasized in studies of multiteam systems, other in-
terteam processes that have been shown to support team performance,
such as the degree to which teams scout information, represent their
work to others, and guard/protect their borders (Ancona & Caldwell,
1992, b) are largely ignored. Again, skill in these more ‘politically-or-
iented’ behaviors may be essential to leaders' abilities to navigate the
tensions of interteam contexts.

Third, many studies in Categories 2 and 4 suggest that certain cross-
boundary processes might have non-linear effects for team or system
objectives. For example, the literature on boundary spanning empha-
sizes that team leaders should help their teams strike an appropriate
balance of team permeability (Benoliel & Somech, 2015). Likewise, the
literature on multiteam systems suggests that although coordination
between teams through direct mutual adjustment is often necessary,
inefficient patterns of interteam coordination that are not well-matched
to task demands can be harmful (Davison, Hollenbeck, Barnes,
Sleesman, & Ilgen, 2012; Marks, DeChurch, Mathieu, Panzer, & Alonso,
2005). These previous investigations which have uncovered non-linear
effects of ‘beneficial’ team interteam phenomena point to a need for
future research to continue this line of inquiry, particularly in light of
mounting evidence that many phenomena exhibit a ‘too much of a good
thing’ effect (Pierce & Aguinis, 2013). We also encourage research to
identify specific recommendations for leaders about how to establish
the ‘optimal’ levels of team and interteam states and processes.

Finally, we emphasize that, as researchers, we cannot assume that it
is clear which goals will take priority. Leadership, in this review, has
been functionally defined as meeting the needs of the team and/or the
system to enable goal-fulfillment. However, this is the functional
ideal— in reality it is less clear which ‘needs’ leaders will focus on
meeting. One specific pathway to understand how leaders may navigate
tensions created by conflicting team/team or team/system goals is to
consider leaders' accountability. Accountability refers to the “perceived
expectation that one's decisions or actions will be evaluated by a salient
audience and that rewards or sanctions are believed to be contingent on
this expected evaluation” (Hall & Ferris, 2011, p. 134). Notably, re-
wards and sanctions do not need to be material in nature (e.g., pay or
performance evaluations), but rather, can come in the form of im-
plications for one's social reputation (see review by Hall, Frink, &
Buckley, 2017).

We expect personal and professional dynamics in many workplaces
to produce accountability structures that differ widely from what one
might expect based on formal hierarchies or workflow processes.
Individuals' are driven to maintain good standing in the eyes of those
they deem to be key constituents (Tetlock, 1999), thus, how individuals
prioritize team and system goals may be governed by their perceived
accountability to different actors or groups in the organization. For
example, leaders may need to give an account of their actions to not
only superiors, but also peers, and subordinates. Relatedly, a key ‘role’
of leadership may be to communicate what is important and to whom
members are accountable. Organizations might assume certain ‘pre-
scribed’ objectives are also ‘perceived,’ but that is not always the case,
and leaders (formal and informal) can significantly impact local per-
ceptions of what is important (e.g., within teams). Despite being de-
scribed as “the adhesive that binds social systems together” (Frink &
Klimoski, 1998, p. 3), our review found that discussions of account-
ability are absent from studies of leadership in interteam contexts.

#2 - Elaborate ‘what’ in the context of ‘when’

Many of the studies we reviewed demonstrated the growing ma-
turity of the leadership field by exploring critical boundary conditions
of leadership processes which originate within teams, between teams,
and/or in the embedding environment. However, we also identified
significant opportunities to advance knowledge about leadership in

interteam contexts by examining additional moderators—particularly
with regard to leadership processes spanning team boundaries.
Therefore, our second recommendation is to better elaborate ‘what’
leaders do in the context of ‘when.’ We highlight a few examples below.

First, like most areas of organizational research, there is an obvious
need to better understand how leadership processes within and across
teams play out across time. We found almost no research in Category 2
investigating how the timing of cross-boundary activities might impact
team outcomes. In contrast, research on multiteam systems has begun
to consider how interteam leadership processes might need to be mat-
ched to the phase of system task performance (DeChurch et al., 2011;
DeChurch & Marks, 2006; Lanaj, Hollenbeck, Ilgen, Barnes, & Harmon,
2013). However, across all categories of our framework, we found a
preponderance of short-term and cross-sectional studies (see Table 3). It
is difficult to make firm recommendations for leaders based on short-
term studies of leadership and collaboration given evidence suggesting
teams and systems change in meaningful ways over time (Gersick,
1991; Kozlowski et al., 1996). In fact, in one of the few studies of cross-
boundary processes across time, Ancona (1990) showed teams that use
‘probing’ strategies suffered short term decrements in team satisfaction
but performed the best in the long term.

Notably, cross-sectional designs can also severely undermine the
ability to assess causality and endogeneity concerns. Briefly, endogeneity
concerns exist when the effect of x on y cannot be interpreted because it
includes omitted causes and results due to a variety of study design
flaws, including omitted variables, omitted selection, simultaneity,
common-method variance, and measurement error (for an in-depth
review of endogeneity see Antonakis, Bendahan, Jacquart, & Lalive,
2010; Antonakis & House, 2014). Although it appears (see Table 3) that
researchers often address one potential source of endogeneity (i.e., by
using multi-source data), there are additional recommendations that
can help address other sources. First, increased use of appropriate
control variables, which Antonakis et al. (2010) defined as “exogenous
sources of variance that do not correlate with the error term” (p. 1099),
can help address omitted variable bias. Second, increasing the use of
experimental or quasi-experimental designs could allow researchers to
disentangle causal effects (Stone-Romero, 2008). Further, none of the
studies we reviewed utilized field experiments. Field experiments have
been used in other disciplines, including economics, for a considerable
period of time (some would argue since the 1920s; Levitt & List, 2009).
Although the use of field experiments is less prevalent in the realm of
leadership research (with notable exceptions e.g., Dvir, Eden, Avolio, &
Shamir, 2002), there are substantial benefits of using field experiments
that could reduce potential concerns regarding causality and en-
dogeneity and might be a fertile ground for testing theory central to
leadership in intergroup contexts in a controlled and rigorous way.

Second, although qualitative studies of multiteam systems often
emphasize that task demands and system memberships can shift dy-
namically over time, quantitative studies, especially those conducted in
laboratory settings, have tended to model multiteam systems with ex-
tremely stable memberships and task demands that operate on rela-
tively short (3–4 h) time frames. Thus, we identified a need for quan-
titative studies of interdependent systems to consider how leadership
processes might support major changes in task demands and system
memberships. Important questions include: What leadership processes
allow high functioning systems to remain so when power dynamics shift
as teams that were more central to system task demands become less
central? What leadership processes are most effective in dynamic in-
terdependent systems where team membership is highly fluid (i.e.,
teams are aggregating and disaggregating as a system in response to
environmental changes)?

Third, additional research is warranted that evaluates how the types
of system tasks might determine the most effective patterns of leader-
ship and teamwork processes. Teams and systems tackle a variety of
types of tasks ranging from more conceptual (e.g., intellective tasks,
decision-making tasks, creativity tasks, cognitive conflict tasks) to more

D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378

13



behavioral (e.g., planning, resolving mixed motives, competitions,
psycho-motor tasks; McGrath, 1984). However, whereas the qualitative
(e.g., case studies) of multiteam systems we reviewed considered both
highly conceptual (e.g., innovation) as well as highly behavioral (e.g.,
disaster response) system demands, the majority of the quantitative
empirical studies we reviewed focused exclusively on behavioral tasks
(e.g., military simulations; Davison, Hollenbeck, Barnes, Sleesman, &
Ilgen, 2012; DeChurch & Marks, 2006; de Vries, Hollenbeck, Davison,
Walter, & Van der Vegt, 2016; Marks, DeChurch, Mathieu, Panzer, &
Alonso, 2005; Murase, Carter, DeChurch, & Marks, 2014; Lanaj,
Hollenbeck, Ilgen, Barnes, & Harmon, 2013; Firth, Hollenbeck, Miles,
Ilgen, & Barnes, 2015; Lanaj, Foulk, & Hollenbeck, 2018; Porck et al.,
2019). Interestingly, an overarching conclusion from these studies ap-
pears to be that a multiteam system will function best when team
identification is strong, teams are rather insular, and interteam co-
ordination processes are handled almost exclusively by a select set of
boundary spanners and members of formal leadership teams. However,
in the context of creativity tasks, studies from Category 2 have sug-
gested that when teams are overly insular and believe they have a
monopoly on a particular domain, they may be unwilling to be influ-
enced by the contributions offered by ‘outsiders’ and consequently, may
suffer creativity decrements (Dokko, Kane, & Tortoriello, 2014;
Carbonell & Rodríguez Escudero, 2019). Further, whereas studies of
team boundary spanning have suggested that teams engage in more
boundary activities during times of task uncertainty (Faraj & Yan,
2009), theoretical work on multiteam systems suggests that team
members may engage in less interteam interaction under situations of
high task uncertainty (Luciano et al., 2018). Clearly more research is
needed to disentangle these inconsistencies and provide more targeted
recommendations for leaders.

Relatedly, we believe that exploring how leadership processes
should be matched to the nature of interteam interdependence (driven by
task demands) is a promising avenue for future research. Pairs of in-
terdependent teams in organizational systems might be engaged in
pooled (additive), sequential, reciprocal, and/or intensive forms of inter-
dependence at certain points in time (Kennedy, Sommer, & Nguyen,
2017; Marks, DeChurch, Mathieu, Panzer, & Alonso, 2005; Mathieu
et al., 2001). These different forms of interteam interdependence may
be used as a preliminary guide for structuring leadership processes
between teams (e.g., determining ‘who’ should enact leadership and
‘what’ processes are most critical) and for helping leaders understand
how to prioritize goals (establish ‘why’ for the team) when they face
potential trade-offs across levels of a multiteam goal hierarchy. That is,
when teams are pursuing shared goals that require pooled forms of
interdependence, they work separately, but may benefit from an
awareness of what other teams are doing. Under these circumstances,
emphasizing team level goals is a top priority and external leadership
processes (and/or boundary activities) may be kept to a minimum.
However, as pairs of teams move toward highly intensive forms of in-
terdependence driven by superordinate goals, leadership processes may
need to shift toward enhancing collaborative psychological states be-
tween teams that support joint problem solving and integration of ideas
without also losing sight of team-level goal accomplishment, and may
need to involve more (formal and informal) leaders. Unfortunately,
only a small subset of the studies we reviewed described the nature of
interteam interdependencies in great detail, particularly within Cate-
gory 2. Thus, in order to build an evidence base related to these pro-
positions, we strongly suggest that future research specify the nature of
the interteam interdependencies between pairs of teams when ex-
amining team and leadership processes.

#3 - Evaluate ‘who’ should (or is likely to) enact ‘what’ ‘where’

Quantitative studies of leadership within teams in support of team
goals (Category 1) are finding that informal leadership (provided by
members of the group) is important and often, augments formal

leadership to improve team effectiveness (e.g., Aime et al., 2014;
Carson, Tesluk, & Marrone, 2007; D'Innocenzo et al., 2016; Klein et al.,
2006; Nicolaides et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2014). However, across the
other three categories of research, we found a paucity of quantitative
investigations of informal leadership. This is unfortunate because
qualitative case studies across all three areas have often found that
informal leadership processes do, in fact, exist in interteam contexts
(Bienefeld & Grote, 2014; Johannessen, McArthur, & Jonassen, 2015;
Malin & Hackmann, 2019), and may not always support team or system
objectives (Ingvaldsen & Rolfsen, 2012). Therefore, our third re-
commendation is for future research to more carefully evaluate the
antecedents and outcomes of informal leadership influence in interteam
contexts.

For example, in the context of studies within Category 2, researchers
have depicted cross-boundary processes as functions that formal leaders
might enact and additionally, as functions that can be distributed
among multiple team members (Marrone, Tesluk, & Carson, 2007).
However, the studies we reviewed typically measured the overall
‘amount’ of team boundary spanning without considering which team
members are enacting those processes (Ancona et al., 2002; Elkins &
Keller, 2003; Ferguson & Blackman, 2019). The few exceptions to this
trend suggest that there are meaningful effects when the patterning of
team members' boundary spanning behavior is taken into account
(Büchel, Nieminen, Armbruster-Domeyer, & Denison, 2013; Oh, Chung,
& Labianca, 2004). Given the complex, multifaceted nature of most
modern workplaces, targeted, purposeful, and coordinated patterns of
boundary spanning efforts are likely to yield more positive results than
unstructured activities, left solely to chance. Leadership in interteam
contexts should work to ensure that the right people within the team
are connecting with the right other people external to the team and that
the cross-boundary actions of team members are not unnecessarily
duplicated or working at cross-purposes. Research is needed to provide
more targeted guidance about how teams can best distribute responsi-
bility for cross-boundary processes to support collective goals.

The vast majority of quantitative studies in Categories 3 and 4 have
investigated leadership influence after a formal leadership team has
been established. There are certainly numerous benefits to having a
formal leadership team that is devoted to achieving the shared super-
ordinate goal of the system and is focused exclusively on managing all
interteam coordination demands (Davison, Hollenbeck, Barnes,
Sleesman, & Ilgen, 2012; DeChurch & Marks, 2006; Firth, Hollenbeck,
Miles, Ilgen, & Barnes, 2015). Unfortunately, not all systems contain a
formal leadership team, at least not during the initial stages of system
performance. Moreover, even when formal leadership teams are es-
tablished, there may be power dynamics at play and disagreements
about which goals should be prioritized (Newell & Swan, 2000). Indeed,
Lanaj, Foulk, & Hollenbeck, 2018 findings that formal leadership teams
and lower level component teams can hold (and express) different
preferences for risk taking hint at the possibility that ‘leadership’ in-
fluence can emanate from formal as well as informal sources.

Therefore, we strongly suggest that future research should seek to
better understand why informal leadership influence processes arise
within and across teams—particularly in the context of interdependent
teams whose joint efforts could be used to achieve important societal or
organizational goals. Doing so could help illuminate whether the pat-
terns of leadership influence that are associated with high levels of
system performance under certain circumstances are also the patterns
that are likely to arise. Moreover, should researchers find that the pat-
terns of leadership that are likely to emerge are not the patterns of
leadership that are most effective, understanding the antecedents of
these social systems could help point toward organizational interven-
tions.

For example, the design of organizational structures and workflows
as well as decisions regarding goals, reward systems, and personnel
(e.g., new hires or inter-unit transfers) are often not made with the
explicit purpose of influencing how employees interact with each other;

D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378

14



nevertheless, these decisions by formal leaders shape how networks of
relationships (including informal leadership) develop in the workplace
(Antonakis & House, 2014; Brass, 2001; Brass & Krackhardt, 1999).
These decisions “fundamentally alter the internal social structure of
organizations by fluctuating the pool of human capital (i.e., composi-
tion), altering employee interaction patterns (i.e., configuration), and
changing the nature of employee relationships (i.e., content)” (Methot,
Rosado-Solomon, & Allen, 2018; p. 726). Thus, formal leaders should
include in their calculus how decisions regarding personnel assign-
ments, work design, goals, and performance evaluations might shape
the development of relationships among employees that impact the
achievement of collective goals (Cullen-Lester, Maupin, & Carter,
2017).

Notably, simply prescribing patterns of cross-boundary activities
needed to achieve team and system goals may not be sufficient and
could even be detrimental (e.g., employees may respond negatively if
they feel the organization is trying to control or prescribe whom they
should talk to, develop friendships with, or try to influence). Thus, we
argue that leaders would be better served to focus on understanding
how they can set up the ‘facilitating conditions’ (Hackman, 2012) that
support the emergence of beneficial networks of informal influence in
interdependent systems (i.e., conditions that allow groups to chart their
own course in support of both team and system goals) as opposed to
attempting to prescribe formalized structures in their entirety. For in-
stance, research suggests that actions of formal leaders' signal whether
it is advisable for members of their team to form cross-boundary re-
lationships. Leaders encourage cooperation or, conversely, competition
with their rhetoric and the goals and structures they emphasize (Kaiser,
Hogan, & Craig, 2008). For example, leaders who emphasize intra-or-
ganizational comparisons may improve performance for their team by
increasing motivation, but this decision may also evoke feelings of
rivalry with others (Kilduff, 2014; Kilduff, Elfenbein, & Staw, 2010) and
lead to destructive competitive emotions (e.g., envy; Nickerson &
Zenger, 2008) and behaviors (e.g., dishonesty; Charness, Masclet, &
Villeval, 2013; Chan, Li, & Pierce, 2014; excessive risk taking;
Kacperczyk, Beckman, & Moliterno, 2015).

Future research might also draw inspiration from the fields of eco-
nomics (e.g., retirement savings), healthcare (e.g., exercise or food
choices), and marketing (e.g., product purchases) to learn how leaders
might ‘nudge’ employees toward making decisions that will help their
team and the broader organizational system in which the team is em-
bedded when developing, maintaining, and altering their workplace
relationships. Recently, Tawse, Patrick, and Vera (2019) proposed that
nudges (i.e., “any aspect of the choice architecture that alters people's
behavior in a predictable way”, Thaler & Sunstein, 2008, p. 6) might be
used to encourage strategic leaders to shift their attention from plan-
ning activities to the hard work of strategy implementation. They
proposed that nudges may be used to create an implementation mindset
by removing planning distractions and using verbal framing to
strengthen managers' willpower. Future research might focus on iden-
tifying nudges that leaders might use to encourage desirable cross-
boundary behaviors. Although the aim is not to ‘prescribe’ the devel-
opment of specific relationships, formal leaders still need to have a
clear picture of what types and patterns of cross-boundary connections
are needed in order to achieve collective goals across levels so that they
might create conditions that encourage employees to form these re-
lationships themselves.

Conclusion

Enacting leadership in interteam contexts is often a balancing act
and a moving target—and so is the study of leadership in interteam
contexts. We applaud previous researchers who have taken on the im-
mensely complex challenge of delineating the nature of ‘functional’
leadership in interteam contexts. We hope this review serves as a
foundation for future research that connects ideas and perspectives

across disparate areas of inquiry in order to further clarify how formal
and informal leaders and leadership processes within and across teams
support organizational objectives across team and system levels.

References

Aime, F., Humphrey, S., DeRue, D. S., & Paul, J. B. (2014). The riddle of heterarchy:
Power transitions in cross-functional teams. Academy of Management Journal, 57(2),
327–352.

Alter, C. (1990). An exploratory study of conflict and coordination in interorganizational
service delivery system. Academy of Management Journal, 33(3), 478–502.

Ancona, D., Bresman, H., & Kaeufer, K. (2002). The comparative advantage of X-teams.
MIT Sloan Management Review, 43(3), 33–39.

Ancona, D. G. (1990). Outward bound: Strategic for team survival in an organization.
Academy of Management Journal, 33(2), 334–365.

Ancona, D. G. (1993). The classics and the contemporary: A new blend of small group
theory. In J. K. Murnighan (Ed.). Social psychology in organizations: Advances in theory
and research (pp. 225–243). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Ancona, D. G., & Caldwell, D. F. (1988). Beyond task and maintenance: Defining external
functions in groups. Group & Organization Studies, 13(4), 468–494.

Ancona, D. G., & Caldwell, D. (1990). Beyond boundary spanning: Managing external
dependence in product development teams. The Journal of High Technology
Management Research, 1(2), 119–135.

Ancona, D. G., & Caldwell, D. F. (1992a). Demography and design: Predictors of new
product team performance. Organization Science, 3(3), 321–341.

Ancona, D. G., & Caldwell, D. F. (1992b). Bridging the boundary: External activity and
performance in organizational teams. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37(4),
634–655.

Ancona, D. G., & Caldwell, D. F. (1998). Rethinking team composition from the outside in.
In D. H. Gruenfeld (Ed.). Research on managing groups and teams (pp. 21–37). Stamford
CT: Elsevier Science/JAI Press.

Anderson, P. H., & Kragh, H. (2015). Exploring boundary-spanning practices among
creativity managers. Management Decision, 53(4), 786–808.

Antonakis, J., Bendahan, S., Jacquart, P., & Lalive, R. (2010). On making causal claims: A
review and recommendations. The Leadership Quarterly, 21(6), 1086–1120.

Antonakis, J., & House, R. J. (2014). Instrumental leadership: Measurement and extension
of transformational–transactional leadership theory. The Leadership Quarterly, 25(4),
746–771.

Arnett, D. B., & Wittmann, C. M. (2014). Improving marketing success: The role of tacit
knowledge exchange between sales and marketing. Journal of Business Research,
67(3), 324–331.

Arrow, H., McGrath, J. E., & Berdahl, J. L. (2000). Small groups as complex systems.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Aubé, C., & Rousseau, V. (2005). Team goal commitment and team effectiveness: The role
of task interdependence and supportive behaviors. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research,
and Practice, 9(3), 189–204.

Balkundi, P., & Harrison, D. A. (2006). Ties, leaders, and time in teams: Strong inference
about network structure’s effects on team viability and performance. Academy of
Management Journal, 49(1), 49–68.

Banks, G. C., McCauley, K. D., Gardner, W. L., & Guler, C. E. (2016). A meta-analytic
review of authentic and transformational leadership: A test for redundancy. The
Leadership Quarterly, 27(4), 634–652.

Bass, B. M. (1985). Leadership and performance beyond expectations. New York: Free Press.
Bass, B. M. (1990). From transactional to transformational leadership: Learning to share

the vision. Organizational Dynamics, 18(3), 19–31.
Bass, B. M., & Avolio, B. J. (1993). Transformational leadership: A response to critiques.

In M. M. Chemers, & R. Ayman (Eds.). Leadership theory and research: Perspectives and
directions (pp. 49–80). San Diego, CA, US: Academic Press.

Bass, B. M., & Avolio, B. J. (Eds.). (1994). Improving organizational effectiveness through
transformational leadership. Thousand Oaks, CA, US: Sage Publications, Inc.

Bearman, C., Paletz, S. B., Orasanu, J., & Thomas, M. J. (2010). The breakdown of co-
ordinated decision making in distributed systems. Human Factors, 52(2), 173–188.

Beck, T. E., & Plowman, D. A. (2013). Temporary, emergent interorganizational colla-
boration in unexpected circumstances: A study of the Columbia space shuttle re-
sponse effort. Organization Science, 25(4), 1234–1252.

Benoliel, P., & Somech, A. (2015). The role of leader boundary activities in enhancing
interdisciplinary team effectiveness. Small Group Research, 46(1), 83–124.

Bick, S., Spohrer, K., Hoda, R., Scheerer, A., & Heinzl, A. (2018). Coordination challenges
in large-scale software development: A case study of planning misalignment in hybrid
settings. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 44(10), 932–950.

Bienefeld, N., & Grote, G. (2014). Speaking up in ad hoc multiteam systems: Individual-
level effects of psychological safety, status, and leadership within and across teams.
European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 23(6), 930–945.

Bienefeld, N., & Grote, G. (2014). Shared leadership in multiteam systems: How cockpit
and cabin crews lead each other to safety. Human Factors, 56(2), 270–286.

Birkinshaw, J., Ambos, T. C., & Bouquet, C. (2017). Boundary spanning activities of
corporate HQ executives insights from a longitudinal study. Journal of Management
Studies, 54(4), 422–454.

Blake, R. R., Shepard, H. A., & Mouton, J. S. (1964). Managing intergroup conflict in in-
dustry. Houston, TX: Gulf Publishing Company.

Brass, D. J. (2001). Social capital and organizational leadership. In S. J. Zaccaro, & R. J.
Klimoski (Eds.). The nature of organizational leadership (pp. 132–152). San Francisco,
CA: Jossey-Bass.

Brass, D. J., & Krackhardt, D. (1999). The social capital of 21st century leaders. In J. G.

D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378

15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0185


Hunt, & R. L. Phillips (Eds.). Out-of-the-box leadership (pp. 179–194). Stamford, CT:
JAI Press.

Zolper, K., Beimborn, D., & Weitzel, T. (2013). When the river leaves its bed: Analyzing
deviations between planned and actual interaction structures in IT change processes.
Journal of Information Technology, 28(4), 333–353.

Brett, J.M., & Rognes, J.K. (1986). Intergroup relations in organizations. In P.S. Goodman
& Associates (Eds.), Designing effective work groups (pp. 202–236). San Francisco,
CA: Jossey-Bass.

Brion, S., Chauvet, V., Chollet, B., & Mothe, C. (2012). Project leaders as boundary
spanners: Relational antecedents and performance outcomes. International Journal of
Project Management, 30(6), 708–722.

Büchel, B., Nieminen, L., Armbruster-Domeyer, H., & Denison, D. (2013). Managing
stakeholders in team-based innovation: The dynamics of knowledge and trust net-
works. European Journal of Innovation Management, 16(1), 22–49.

Bullinger, A. C., Neyer, A. K., Rass, M., & Moeslein, K. M. (2010). Community-based
innovation contests: Where competition meets cooperation. Creativity and Innovation
Management, 19(3), 290–303.

Burke, C. S., Stagl, K. C., Klein, C., Goodwin, G. F., Salas, E., & Halpin, S. M. (2006). What
type of leadership behaviors are functional in teams? A meta-analysis. The Leadership
Quarterly, 17(3), 288–307.

Burt, R. S. (1992). Structural holes. The social structure of competition. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Carbonell, P., & Rodríguez Escudero, A. I. (2019). The dark side of team social cohesion in
NPD team boundary spanning. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 36(2),
149–171.

Carson, J. B., Tesluk, P. E., & Marrone, J. A. (2007). Shared leadership in teams: An
investigation of antecedent conditions and performance. Academy of Management
Journal, 50(5), 1217–1234.

Carter, D. R., & DeChurch, L. A. (2014). Leadership in multiteam systems: A network
perspective. In D. Day (Ed.). The Oxford handbook of leadership (pp. 483–505). New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Carter, D. R., DeChurch, L. A., Braun, M., & Contractor, N. (2015). Social network ap-
proaches to leadership: An integrative conceptual review. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 100(3), 597–622.

Cha, J., Kim, Y., Lee, J. Y., & Bachrach, D. G. (2015). Transformational leadership and
inter-team collaboration: Exploring the mediating role of teamwork quality and
moderating role of team size. Group & Organization Management, 40(6), 715–743.

Chan, C. C., Pearson, C., & Entrekin, L. (2003). Examining the effects of internal and
external team learning on team performance. Team Performance Management, 9(7/8),
174–181.

Chan, T. Y., Li, J., & Pierce, L. (2014). Compensation and peer effects in competing sales
teams. Management Science, 60(8), 1965–1984.

Charness, G., Masclet, D., & Villeval, M. C. (2013). The dark side of competition for status.
Management Science, 60(1), 38–55.

Chen, M. H., & Wang, M. C. (2008). Social networks and a new venture’s innovative
capability: The role of trust within entrepreneurial teams. R&D Management, 38(3),
253–264.

Choi, J. N. (2002). External activities and team effectiveness: Review and theoretical
development. Small Group Research, 33(2), 181–208.

Chuang, C. H., Jackson, S. E., & Jiang, Y. (2016). Can knowledge-intensive teamwork be
managed? Examining the roles of HRM systems, leadership, and tacit knowledge.
Journal of Management, 42(2), 524–554.

Chung, Y., & Jackson, S. E. (2013). The internal and external networks of knowledge-
intensive teams: The role of task routineness. Journal of Management, 39(2), 442–468.

Connaughton, S. L., Williams, E. A., & Shuffler, M. L. (2012). Social identity issues in
multiteam systems: Considerations for future research. In S. J. Zaccaro, M. A. Marks,
& L. A. DeChurch (Eds.). Multiteam systems: An organization form for dynamic and
complex environments (pp. 109–140). New York, NY: Routledge Taylor & Francis
Group.

Contractor, N. S., DeChurch, L. A., Carson, J., Carter, D. R., & Keegan, B. (2012). The
topology of collective leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 23(6), 994–1011.

Corsaro, D., Ramos, C., Henneberg, S. C., & Naudé, P. (2012). The impact of network
configurations on value constellations in business markets—The case of an innova-
tion network. Industrial Marketing Management, 41(1), 54–67.

Cross, R., Rebele, R., & Grant, A. (2016). Collaborative overload. Harvard Business Review,
94(1), 74–79.

Cuijpers, M., Uitdewilligen, S., & Guenter, H. (2016). Effects of dual identification and
interteam conflict on multiteam system performance. Journal of Occupational and
Organizational Psychology, 89(1), 141–171.

Cullen-Lester, K. L., Maupin, C. K., & Carter, D. R. (2017). Incorporating social networks
into leadership development: A conceptual model and evaluation of research and
practice. The Leadership Quarterly, 28(1), 130–152.

Cullen-Lester, K. L., & Yammarino, Y. J. (2016). Collective and network approaches to
leadership: Special issue introduction. The Leadership Quarterly, 27(2), 173–180.

Cummings, J. N., & Kiesler, S. (2005). Collaborative research across disciplinary and
organizational boundaries. Social Studies of Science, 35(5), 703–722.

Curnin, S., Owen, C., & Trist, C. (2014). Managing the constraints of boundary spanning
in emergency management. Cognition, Technology & Work, 16(4), 549–563.

Dahl, M. S., & Pedersen, C. (2005). Social networks in the R&D process: The case of the
wireless communication industry around Aalborg, Denmark. Journal of Engineering
and Technology Management, 22(1–2), 75–92.

Dansereau, F., Graen, G., & Haga, W. J. (1975). A vertical dyad linkage approach to
leadership within formal organizations: A longitudinal investigation of the role
making process. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 13(1), 46–78.

Davison, R. B., Hollenbeck, J. R., Barnes, C. M., Sleesman, D. J., & Ilgen, D. R. (2012).
Coordinated action in multiteam systems. Journal of Applied Psychology, 97(4),

808–824.
Day, D. V., Gronn, P., & Salas, E. (2004). Leadership capacity in teams. The Leadership

Quarterly, 15(6), 857–880.
de Vries, T. A., Hollenbeck, J. R., Davison, R. B., Walter, F., & Van der Vegt, G. S. (2016).

Managing coordination in multiteam systems: Integrating micro and macro per-
spectives. Academy of Management Journal, 59(5), 1823–1844.

de Vries, T. A., Walter, F., Van der Vegt, G. S., & Essens, P. J. (2014). Antecedents of
individuals’ interteam coordination: Broad functional experiences as a mixed bles-
sing. Academy of Management Journal, 57(5), 1334–1359.

DeChurch, L. A., Burke, C. S., Shuffler, M. L., Lyons, R., Doty, D., & Salas, E. (2011). A
historiometric analysis of leadership in mission critical multiteam environments. The
Leadership Quarterly, 22(1), 152–169.

DeChurch, L. A., & Marks, M. A. (2006). Leadership in multiteam systems. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 91(2), 311.

DeRue, D. S., & Ashford, S. J. (2010). Who will lead and who will follow? A social process
of leadership identity construction in organizations. Academy of Management Review,
35(4), 627–647.

Derue, D. S., Nahrgang, J., Wellman, N., & Humphrey, S. E. (2011). Trait and behavioral
theories of leadership: An integration and meta-analytic test of their relative validity.
Personnel Psychology, 64(1), 7–52.

DiazGranados, D., Dow, A. W., Perry, S. J., & Palesis, J. A. (2014). Understanding patient
care as a multiteam system. Pushing the boundaries: Multiteam systems in research and
practice (pp. 95–113). Houston, TX: Emerald Group Publishing Limited.

Dinh, J. E., Lord, R. G., Gardner, W. L., Meuser, J. D., Liden, R. C., & Hu, J. (2014).
Leadership theory and research in the new millennium: Current theoretical trends
and changing perspectives. The Leadership Quarterly, 25(1), 36–62.

D’Innocenzo, L., Mathieu, J. E., & Kukenberger, M. R. (2016). A meta-analysis of different
forms of shared leadership–team performance relations. Journal of Management,
42(7), 1964–1991.

Dokko, G., Kane, A. A., & Tortoriello, M. (2014). One of us or one of my friends: How
social identity and tie strength shape the creative generativity of boundary-spanning
ties. Organization Studies, 35(5), 703–726.

Drach-Zahavy, A. (2011). Interorganizational teams as boundary spanners: The role of
team diversity, boundedness, and extrateam links. European Journal of Work and
Organizational Psychology, 20(1), 89–118.

Dvir, T., Eden, D., Avolio, B. J., & Shamir, B. (2002). Impact of transformational lea-
dership on follower development and performance: A field experiment. Academy of
Management Journal, 45(4), 735–744.

Edmondson, A. C. (1999). Psychological safety and learning behavior in work teams.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 44(2), 350–383.

Edmondson, A. C. (2003). Speaking up in the operating room: How team leaders promote
learning in interdisciplinary action teams. Journal of Management Studies, 40(6),
1419–1452.

Elkins, T., & Keller, R. T. (2003). Leadership in research and development organizations:
A literature review and conceptual framework. The Leadership Quarterly, 14(4/5),
587–606.

Ernst, C., & Chrobot-Mason, D. (2011a). Boundary spanning leadership. New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill.

Ernst, C., & Chrobot-Mason, D. (2011b). Flat world, hard boundaries: How to lead across
them. MIT Sloan Management Review, 52(3), 81–88.

Faraj, S., & Yan, A. (2009). Boundary work in knowledge teams. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 94(3), 604–617.

Farh, C. I., & Chen, G. (2018). Leadership and member voice in action teams: Test of a
dynamic phase model. Journal of Applied Psychology, 103(1), 97–110.

Ferguson, A. J., Ormiston, M. E., & Wong, E. M. (2019). The effects of cohesion and
structural position on the top management team boundary spanning–firm perfor-
mance relationship. Group & Organization Management, 44(6), 1099–1135.

Ferguson, S., & Blackman, D. (2019). Translating innovative practices into organizational
knowledge in the public sector: A case study. Journal of Management & Organization,
25(1), 42–57.

Fiedler, F. E. (1967). A theory of leadership effectiveness. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Firth, B. M., Hollenbeck, J. R., Miles, J. E., Ilgen, D. R., & Barnes, C. M. (2015). Same

page, different books: Extending representational gaps theory to enhance perfor-
mance in multiteam systems. Academy of Management Journal, 58(3), 813–835.

Fleishman, E. A., Mumford, M. D., Zaccaro, S. J., Levin, K. Y., Korotkin, A. L., & Hein, M.
B. (1991). Taxonomic efforts in the description of leader behavior: A synthesis and
functional interpretation. The Leadership Quarterly, 2(4), 245–287.

Fleştea, A. M., Curşeu, P. L., & Fodor, O. C. (2017). The bittersweet effect of power dis-
parity: Implications for emergent states in collaborative multi-party systems. Journal
of Managerial Psychology, 32(5), 401–416.

Floyd, S. W., & Wooldridge, B. (1997). Middle management’s strategic influence and
organizational performance. Journal of Management Studies, 34(3), 465–485.

Follett, M. P. (1924). Creative experience. New York, NY: Longmans, Green.
Foss, K., & Rodgers, W. (2011). Enhancing information usefulness by line managers’ in-

volvement in cross-unit activities. Organization Studies, 32(5), 683–703.
Friedman, R. A., & Podolny, J. (1992). Differentiation of boundary spanning roles: Labor

negotiations and implications for role conflict. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37(1),
28–47.

Frink, D. D., & Klimoski, R. J. (1998). Toward a theory of accountability in organizations
and human resources management. In G. R. Ferris (Vol. Ed.), Research in personnel and
human resources management. Vol. 16. Research in personnel and human resources
management (pp. 1–51). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Gardner, R. G., Harris, T. B., Li, N., Kirkman, B. L., & Mathieu, J. E. (2017). Understanding
“it depends” in organizational research: A theory-based taxonomy, review, and future
research agenda concerning interactive and quadratic relationships. Organizational
Research Methods, 20(4), 610–638.

D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378

16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0545
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0545
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0545
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0545
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0550


Garvin, D. A., Edmondson, A. C., & Gino, F. (2008). Is yours a learning organization.
Harvard Business Review, 86(3), 109.

Gasson, S. (2005). The dynamics of sensemaking, knowledge and expertise in colla-
borative, boundary-spanning design. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication,
10, 23–34.

Gerber, D. E., Reimer, T., Williams, E. L., Gill, M., Loudat Priddy, L., Bergestuen, D., ...
Craddock Lee, S. J (2016). Resolving rivalries and realigning goals: Challenges of
clinical and research multiteam systems. Journal of Oncology Practice, 12(11),
1020–1028.

Gersick, C. J. G. (1991). Revolutionary change theories: A multilevel exploration of the
punctuated equilibrium paradigm. Academy of Management Review, 16(1), 10–36.

Gil, F., Alcover, C. M., Peiró, J. M., Rico, R., Alcover, C. M., & Barrasa, Á. (2005). Change-
oriented leadership, satisfaction and performance in work groups. Journal of
Managerial Psychology, 20, 312–328.

Glaser, L., Fourné, S. P., & Elfring, T. (2015). Achieving strategic renewal: The multi-level
influences of top and middle managers’ boundary-spanning. Small Business Economics,
45(2), 305–327.

Gleibs, I. H., & Haslam, S. A. (2016). Do we want a fighter? The influence of group status
and the stability of intergroup relations on leader prototypicality and endorsement.
The Leadership Quarterly, 27(4), 557–573.

Glynn, M. A., Kazanjian, R., & Drazin, R. (2010). Fostering innovation in complex product
development settings: The role of team member identity and interteam inter-
dependence. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 27(7), 1082–1095.

Graen, G. B. (1976). Role-making processes within complex organizations. In M. D.
Dunnette (Ed.). Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (pp. 1201–1245).
Chicago, IL: Rand McNally.

Graen, G. B., & Cashman, J. F. (1975). A role-making model of leadership in formal or-
ganisations: A developmental approach. In J. G. Hunt, & L. L. Larson (Eds.).
Leadership frontiers (pp. 143–165). Kent, OH: Kent State University Press.

Graen, G. B., & Uhl-Bien, M. (1995). Relationship-based approach to leadership:
Development of Leader-Member-Exchange (LMX) Theory of leadership over 25 years:
Applying a multi-level multi-domain perspective. The Leadership Quarterly, 6(2),
219–247.

Gray, S. M., Bunderson, J. S., Boumgarden, P., & Bechara, J. P. (2019). Engineering in-
teraction: Structural change, locus of identification, and the formation and main-
tenance of cross-unit ties. Personnel Psychology, 72, 599–622.

Greenleaf, R. K. (1970). The servant as leader. Newton Centre, MA: The Robert K.
Greenleaf Center.

Greenleaf, R. K. (1977). Servant leadership: A journey into the nature of legitimate power and
greatness. New York, NY: Paulist Press.

Grippa, F., Bucuvalas, J., Booth, A., Alessandrini, E., Fronzetti Colladon, A., & Wade, L. M.
(2018). Measuring information exchange and brokerage capacity of healthcare
teams. Management Decision, 56(10), 2239–2251.

Hackman, J., & Walton, R. (1986). Leading groups in organizations. In P. Goodman (Ed.).
Designing effective work groups (pp. 72–117). San Francisco, CA: Jossey- Bass.

Gumusluoglu, L., Karakitapoğlu-Aygün, Z., & Scandura, T. A. (2017). A multilevel ex-
amination of benevolent leadership and innovative behavior in R&D contexts: A so-
cial identity approach. Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies, 24(4), 479–493.

Hackman, J. R. (2012). From causes to conditions in group research. Journal of
Organizational Behavior, 33, 428–444.

Hackman, J. R., & Morris, C. G. (1975). Group tasks, group interaction process, and group
performance effectiveness: A review and proposed integration. Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, 8, 45–99.

Hall, A. T., & Ferris, G. R. (2011). Accountability and extra-role behavior. Employee
Responsibilities and Rights Journal, 23(2), 131–144.

Hall, A. T., Frink, D. D., & Buckley, M. R. (2017). An accountability account: A review and
synthesis of the theoretical and empirical research on felt accountability. Journal of
Organizational Behavior, 38(2), 204–224.

Henttonen, K., Johanson, J. E., & Janhonen, M. (2014). Work-team bonding and bridging
social networks, team identity and performance effectiveness. Personnel Review,
43(3), 330–349.

Hewstone, M. E., & Brown, R. E. (1986). Contact and conflict in intergroup encounters.
Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell.

Hirst, G., & Mann, L. (2004). A model of R&D leadership and team communication: The
relationship with project performance. R&D Management, 34(2), 147–160.

Hoegl, M., & Weinkauf, K. (2005). Managing task interdependencies in multi-team pro-
jects: A longitudinal study. Journal of Management Studies, 42(6), 1287–1308.

Hoegl, M., Weinkauf, K., & Gemuenden, H. G. (2014). Interteam coordination, project
commitment, and teamwork in multiteam R&D projects: A longitudinal study.
Organization Science, 15(1), 38–55.

Hogg, M. A., Van Knippenberg, D., & Rast, D. E. (2012). Intergroup leadership in orga-
nizations: Leading across group and organizational boundaries. Academy of
Management Review, 37(2), 232–255.

Hollander, E. P., & Julian, J. W. (1969). Contemporary trends in the analysis of leadership
processes. Psychological Bulletin, 71, 387–397.

House, R. J. (1971). A path goal theory of leader effectiveness. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 16(3), 321–339.

House, R. J. (1977). A 1976 theory of charismatic leadership. In J. G. Hunt, & L. L. Larson
(Eds.). Leadership: The cutting edge. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

Hu, J., & Judge, T. A. (2017). Leader–team complementarity: Exploring the interactive
effects of leader personality traits and team power distance values on team processes
and performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 102(6), 935–955.

Hurt, K. J. (2016). A theoretical model of training and its transference: The pivotal role of
top management team composition and characteristics. Human Resource Development
International, 19(1), 44–66.

Ingvaldsen, J. A., & Rolfsen, M. (2012). Autonomous work groups and the challenge of

inter-group coordination. Human Relations, 65(7), 861–881.
Janis, I. L. (1971). Groupthink. Psychology Today, 5(6), 43–46.
Johannessen, I. A., McArthur, P. W., & Jonassen, J. R. (2015). Informal leadership re-

dundancy: Balancing structure and flexibility in subsea operations. Scandinavian
Journal of Management, 31(3), 409–423.

Joshi, A., Pandey, N., & Han, G. (2009). Bracketing team boundary spanning: An ex-
amination of task-based, team-level, and contextual antecedents. Journal of
Organizational Behavior, 30(6), 731–759.

Journal Citation Reports (2018). Clarivate analytics.
Judge, T. A., Piccolo, R. F., & Ilies, R. (2004). The forgotten ones? The validity of con-

sideration and initiating structure in leadership research. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 89(1), 36–51.

Jung, D., Yammarino, F. J., & Lee, J. K. (2009). Moderating role of subordinates’ attitudes
on transformational leadership and effectiveness: A multi-cultural and multi-level
perspective. The Leadership Quarterly, 20(4), 586–603.

Kacperczyk, A., Beckman, C. M., & Moliterno, T. P. (2015). Disentangling risk and change:
Internal and external social comparison in the mutual fund industry. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 60(2), 228–262.

Kaiser, R. B., Hogan, R., & Craig, S. B. (2008). Leadership and the fate of organizations.
American Psychologist, 63(2), 96–110.

Katz, D., Maccoby, N., Gurin, G., & Floor, L. G. (1951). Productivity, supervision and morale
among railroad workers. Oxford, England: Survey Research Center.

Katz, R., & Allen, T. J. (1982). Investigating the not invented here (NIH) syndrome: A look
at the performance, tenure, and communication patterns of 50 R & D project groups.
R&D Management, 12(1), 7–20.

Keller, R. T. (2001). Cross-functional project groups in research and new product de-
velopment: Diversity, communications, job stress, and outcomes. Academy of
Management Journal, 44(3), 547–555.

Kellogg, K. C., Orlikowski, W. J., & Yates, J. (2006). Life in the trading zone: Structuring
coordination across boundaries in post-bureaucratic organizations. Organization
Science, 17(1), 22–44.

Kennedy, D. M., Sommer, S. A., & Nguyen, P. A. (2017). Optimizing multi-team system
behaviors: Insights from modeling team communication. European Journal of
Operational Research, 258(1), 264–278.

Kilduff, G. J. (2014). Driven to win: Rivalry, motivation, and performance. Social
Psychological and Personality Science, 5(8), 944–952.

Kilduff, G. J., Elfenbein, H. A., & Staw, B. M. (2010). The psychology of rivalry: A re-
lationally dependent analysis of competition. Academy of Management Journal, 53(5),
943–969.

Kirkman, B. L., & Harris, T. B. (2017). 3D team leadership: A new approach for complex
teams. Stanford University Press.

Klein, K. J., Ziegert, J. C., Knight, A. P., & Xiao, Y. (2006). Dynamic delegation: Shared,
hierarchical, and deindividualized leadership in extreme action teams. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 51(4), 590–621.

Knipfer, K., Schreiner, E., Schmid, E., & Peus, C. (2018). The performance of pre-founding
entrepreneurial teams: The importance of learning and leadership. Applied
Psychology, 67(3), 401–427.

Kozlowski, S. W., Gully, S. M., McHugh, P. P., Salas, E., & Cannon-Bowers, J. A. (1996). A
dynamic theory of leadership and team effectiveness: Developmental and task con-
tingent leader roles. Research in Personnel and Human Resources Management, 14,
253–306.

Kozlowski, S. W., Mak, S., & Chao, G. T. (2016). Team-centric leadership: An integrative
review. Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior, 3,
21–54.

Kozlowski, S. W. J., & Ilgen, D. R. (2006). Enhancing the effectiveness of work groups and
teams. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 7(3), 77–124.

Kozlowski, S. W. J., & Klein, K. J. (2000). A multilevel approach to theory and research in
organizations: Contextual, temporal, and emergent processes. In K. J. Klein, & S. W. J.
Kozlowski (Eds.). Multilevel theory, research, and methods in organizations: Foundations,
extensions, and new directions (pp. 3–90). San Francisco, CA, US: Jossey-Bass.

Kratzer, J., Gemünden, H. G., & Lettl, C. (2008). Balancing creativity and time efficiency
in multi-team R&D projects: The alignment of formal and informal networks. R&D
Management, 38(5), 538–549.

Lanaj, K., Foulk, T. A., & Hollenbeck, J. R. (2018). The benefits of not seeing eye to eye
with leadership: Divergence in risk preferences impacts multiteam system behavior
and performance. Academy of Management Journal, 61(4), 1554–1582.

Lanaj, K., Hollenbeck, J. R., Ilgen, D. R., Barnes, C. M., & Harmon, S. J. (2013). The
double-edged sword of decentralized planning in multiteam systems. Academy of
Management Journal, 56(3), 735–757.

Lee, S., & Sawang, S. (2016). Unpacking the impact of attachment to project teams on
boundary-spanning behaviors. International Journal of Project Management, 34(3),
444–451.

Levitt, S. D., & List, J. A. (2009). Field experiments in economics: The past, the present,
and the future. European Economic Review, 53(1), 1–18.

Liden, R. C., Panaccio, A., Hu, J., & Meuser, J. D. (2014). Servant leadership: Antecedents,
consequences, and contextual moderators. In D. V. Day (Ed.). The Oxford handbook of
leadership and organizations (pp. 357–379). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Litchfield, R. C., Karakitapoğlu-Aygün, Z., Gumusluoglu, L., Carter, M., & Hirst, G. (2018).
When team identity helps innovation and when it hurts: Team identity and its re-
lationship to team and cross-team innovative behavior. Journal of Product Innovation
Management, 35(3), 350–366.

Liu, S., Schuler, R. S., & Zhang, P. (2013). External learning activities and employee
creativity in Chinese R&D teams. Cross Cultural Management: An International Journal,
20(3), 429–448.

Luciano, M. M., DeChurch, L. A., & Mathieu, J. E. (2018). Multiteam systems: A structural
framework and meso-theory of system functioning. Journal of Management, 44(3),

D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378

17

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf6666
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf6666
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf6666
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf2009
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf2009
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf2009
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf2009
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf2933
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf2933
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0570
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0570
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0570
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0580
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0580
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0580
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0595
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0595
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0595
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0600
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0600
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0600
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0605
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0605
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0605
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0605
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0610
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0610
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0610
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0615
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0615
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0620
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0620
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0625
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0625
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0625
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0635
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0635
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0630
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0630
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0630
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0640
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0640
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0645
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0645
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0645
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0650
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0650
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0655
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0655
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0655
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0680
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0680
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0680
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0685
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0685
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0690
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0690
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0695
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0695
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf2333
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf2333
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf2333
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0700
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0700
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0700
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0705
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0705
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0715
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0715
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0720
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0720
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0725
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0725
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0725
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0735
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0735
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0735
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0745
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0745
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0755
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0760
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0760
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0760
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0770
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0770
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0770
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0775
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0780
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0780
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0780
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0785
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0785
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0785
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0790
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0790
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0790
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0795
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0795
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0800
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0800
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0805
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0805
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0805
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0810
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0810
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0810
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0815
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0815
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0815
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0820
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0820
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0820
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0825
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0825
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0830
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0830
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0830
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0835
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0835
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0845
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0845
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0845
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0850
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0850
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0850
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0855
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0855
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0855
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0855
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0860
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0860
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0860
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0865
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0865
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0870
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0870
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0870
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0870
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0875
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0875
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0875
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0885
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0885
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0885
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0890
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0890
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0890
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0895
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0895
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0895
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0910
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0910
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0915
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0915
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0915
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0940
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0940
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0940
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0940
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0950
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0950
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0950
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0955
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0955


1065–1096.
Mackey, J. D., Frieder, R. E., Brees, J. R., & Martinko, M. J. (2017). Abusive supervision: A

meta-analysis and empirical review. Journal of Management, 43(6), 1940–1965.
Malin, J. R., & Hackmann, D. G. (2019). Integrative leadership and cross-sector reforms:

High school career academy implementation in an urban district. Educational
Administration Quarterly, 55(2), 189–224.

Markham, S. K., Green, S. G., & Basu, R. (1991). Champions and antagonists:
Relationships with R&D project characteristics and management. Journal of
Engineering and Technology Management, 8(3–4), 217–242.

Marks, M. A., DeChurch, L. A., Mathieu, J. E., Panzer, F. J., & Alonso, A. (2005).
Teamwork in multiteam systems. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90(5), 964.

Marks, M. A., & Luvison, D. (2012). Product launch and strategic alliance MTSs. In S. J.
Zaccaro, M. A. Marks, & L. A. DeChurch (Eds.). Multiteam systems: An organization
form for dynamic and complex environments (pp. 33–52). New York, NY: Routledge.

Marks, M. A., Mathieu, J. E., & Zaccaro, S. J. (2001). A temporally based framework and
taxonomy of team processes. Academy of Management Review, 26(3), 356–376.

Marrone, J. A. (2010). Team boundary spanning: A multilevel review of past research and
proposals for the future. Journal of Management, 36(4), 911–940.

Marrone, J. A., Tesluk, P. E., & Carson, J. B. (2007). A multilevel investigation of ante-
cedents and consequences of team member boundary-spanning behavior. Academy of
Management Journal, 50(6), 1423–1439.

Martin, R., Guillaume, Y., Thomas, G., Lee, A., & Epitropaki, O. (2016). Leader–member
exchange (LMX) and performance: A meta-analytic review. Personnel Psychology,
69(1), 67–121.

Mathieu, J. E., Hollenbeck, J. R., van Knippenberg, D., & Ilgen, D. R. (2017). A century of
work teams in the journal of applied psychology. Journal of Applied Psychology,
102(3), 452–467.

Mathieu, J. E., Marks, M. A., & Zaccaro, S. J. (2001). Multi-team systems. In N. Anderson,
D. Ones, H. K. Sinangil, & C. Viswesvaran (Eds.). International handbook of work and
organizational psychology (pp. 289–313). London: Sage.

McGrath, J. E. (1962). The influence of quasi-therapeutic relations on adjustment and
effectiveness in rifle teams. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 65, 365–375.

McGrath, J. E. (1964). Toward a “theory of method” for research on organizations. In W.
W. Cooper, L. Leavitt, & M. W. Shelley (Eds.). New perspectives in organization research
(pp. 533–547). New York: John Wiley.

McGrath, J. E. (1984). Groups: Interaction and performance. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall.

Melo, C. D. O., Cruzes, D. S., Kon, F., & Conradi, R. (2013). Interpretative case studies on
agile team productivity and management. Information and Software Technology, 55(2),
412–427.

Meth, N. D., Lawless, B., & Hawryluck, L. (2009). Conflicts in the ICU: Perspectives of
administrators and clinicians. Intensive Care Medicine, 35(12), 2068–2077.

Methot, J. R., Rosado-Solomon, E. H., & Allen, D. G. (2018). The network architecture of
human capital: A relational identity perspective. Academy of Management Review,
43(4), 723–748.

Millikin, J. P., Hom, P. W., & Manz, C. C. (2010). Self-management competencies in self-
managing teams: Their impact on multi-team system productivity. The Leadership
Quarterly, 21(5), 687–702.

Morgeson, F. P., DeRue, D. S., & Karam, E. P. (2010). Leadership in teams: A functional
approach to understanding leadership structures and processes. Journal of
Management, 36(1), 5–39.

Mumford, M. D., Zaccaro, S. J., Harding, F. D., Jacobs, T. O., & Fleishman, E. A. (2000).
Leadership skills for a changing world: Solving complex social problems. The
Leadership Quarterly, 11(1), 11–35.

Murase, T., Carter, D. R., DeChurch, L. A., & Marks, M. A. (2014). Mind the gap: The role
of leadership in multiteam system collective cognition. The Leadership Quarterly,
25(5), 972–986.

Newell, S., David, G., & Chand, D. (2007). An analysis of trust among globally distributed
work teams in an organizational setting. Knowledge and Process Management, 14(3),
158–168.

Newell, S., & Swan, J. (2000). Trust and inter-organizational networking. Human
Relations, 53(10), 1287–1328.

Nickerson, J. A., & Zenger, T. R. (2008). Envy, comparison costs, and the economic theory
of the firm. Strategic Management Journal, 29(13), 1429–1449.

Nicolaides, V. C., LaPort, K. A., Chen, T. R., Tomassetti, A. J., Weis, E. J., Zaccaro, S. J., &
Cortina, J. M. (2014). The shared leadership of teams: A meta-analysis of proximal,
distal, and moderating relationships. The Leadership Quarterly, 25(5), 923–942.

Oh, H., Chung, M. H., & Labianca, G. (2004). Group social capital and group effectiveness:
The role of informal socializing ties. Academy of Management Journal, 47(6), 860–875.

Oh, H., Labianca, G., & Chung, M. H. (2006). A multilevel model of group social capital.
Academy of Management Review, 31(3), 569–582.

Park, G., & DeShon, R. P. (2018). Effects of group-discussion integrative complexity on
intergroup relations in a social dilemma. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 146, 62–75.

Pearce, C. L., & Conger, J. A. (2003). All those years ago: The historical underpinnings of
shared leadership. In C. L. Pearce, & J. A. Conger (Eds.). Shared leadership: Reframing
the hows and whys of leadership (pp. 1–18). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Pedersen, T., Soda, G., & Stea, D. (2019). Globally networked: Intraorganizational
boundary spanning in the global organization. Journal of World Business, 54(3),
169–180.

Pierce, J. R., & Aguinis, H. (2013). The too-much-of-a-good-thing effect in management.
Journal of Management, 39(2), 313–338.

Pittinsky, T. L. (2009). Crossing the divide: Intergroup leadership in a world of difference.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business Press.

Pittinsky, T. L., & Simon, S. (2007). Intergroup leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 18(6),
586–605.

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Lee, J. Y., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2003). Common method
biases in behavioral research: A critical review of the literature and recommended
remedies. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88(5), 879–903.

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2012). Sources of method bias in
social science research and recommendations on how to control it. Annual Review of
Psychology, 63, 539–569.

Podsakoff, P. M., & Organ, D. W. (1986). Self-reports in organizational research: Problems
and prospects. Journal of Management, 12(4), 531–544.

Porck, J. P., Matta, F. K., Hollenbeck, J. R., Oh, J. K., Lanaj, K., & Lee, S. M. (2019). Social
identification in multiteam systems: The role of depletion and task complexity.
Academy of Management Journal, 62(4), 1137–1162.

Porck, J. P., van Knippenberg, D., Tarakci, M., Ateş, N. Y., Groenen, P. J., & de Haas, M.
(2018). Do group and organizational identification help or hurt intergroup strategic
consensus? Journal of Management Advance online publication.

Power, N., & Alison, L. (2017). Offence or defence? Approach and avoid goals in the
multi-agency emergency response to a simulated terrorism attack. Journal of
Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 90(1), 51–76.

Prysor, D., & Henley, A. (2018). Boundary spanning in higher education leadership:
Identifying boundaries and practices in a British university. Studies in Higher
Education, 43(12), 2210–2225.

Purvanova, R. K., & Bono, J. E. (2009). Transformational leadership in context: Face-to-
face and virtual teams. The Leadership Quarterly, 20(3), 343–357.

Quiroz, R., Brunson, L., & Bigras, N. (2017). Transforming social regularities in a mul-
ticomponent community-based intervention: A case study of professionals’ adapt-
ability to better support parents to meet their children’s needs. American Journal of
Community Psychology, 59(3–4), 316–332.

Reddy, M. C., Paul, S. A., Abraham, J., McNeese, M., DeFlitch, C., & Yen, J. (2009).
Challenges to effective crisis management: Using information and communication
technologies to coordinate emergency medical services and emergency department
teams. International Journal of Medical Informatics, 78(4), 259–269.

Richter, A. W., West, M. A., van Dick, R., & Dawson, J. F. (2006). Boundary spanners’
identification, intergroup contact, and effective intergroup relations. Academy of
Management Journal, 49(6), 1252–1269.

Roby, T. B. (1961). The executive function in small groups. In L. Petrullo, & B. M. Bass
(Eds.). Leadership and interpersonal behavior. NewYork: Holt, Reinhart & Winston.

Salazar, M. R., Feitosa, J., & Salas, E. (2017). Diversity and team creativity: Exploring
underlying mechanisms. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice, 21(4),
187–206.

Salk, J. E., & Brannen, M. Y. (2000). National culture, networks, and individual influence
in a multinational management team. Academy of Management Journal, 43(2),
191–202.

Schotter, A., & Beamish, P. W. (2011). Performance effects of MNC head-
quarters–subsidiary conflict and the role of boundary spanners: The case of head-
quarter initiative rejection. Journal of International Management, 17(3), 243–259.

Shin, Y., Kim, M., & Hur, W. M. (2019). Interteam cooperation and competition and
boundary activities: The cross-level mediation of team goal orientations. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 16(15), 2738.

Shuffler, M. L., Jiménez-Rodŕıguez, M., & Kramer, W. S. (2015). The science of multiteam
systems: A review and future research agenda. Small Group Research, 46, 659–699.

Somech, A., & Khalaili, A. (2014). Team boundary activity: Its mediating role in the re-
lationship between structural conditions and team innovation. Group & Organization
Management, 39(3), 274–299.

Spreitzer, G. M., De Janasz, S. C., & Quinn, R. E. (1999). Empowered to lead: The role of
psychological empowerment in leadership. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 20(4),
511–526.

Stogdill, R. (1974). Handbook of leadership. New York: Macmillan.
Stogdill, R. M. (1948). Personal factors associated with leadership: A survey of the lit-

erature. The Journal of Psychology, 25(1), 35–71.
Stogdill, R. M., & Coons, A. E. (1957). Leader behavior: Its description and measurement.

Columbus, OH: Ohio State University, Bureau of Business Research.
Stone-Romero, E. F. (2008). The relative validity and usefulness of various empirical

research designs. In S. G. Rogelberg (Ed.). Handbook of research methods in industrial
and organizational psychology (pp. 77–98). Malden, MA: Blackwell.

Sundstrom, E., DeMeuse, K. P., & Futrell, D. (1990). Work teams: Applications and ef-
fectiveness. American Psychologist, 45, 120–133.

Sung, S. Y., & Choi, J. N. (2012). Effects of team knowledge management on the creativity
and financial performance of organizational teams. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 118(1), 4–13.

Susskind, A. M., Odom-Reed, P. R., & Viccari, A. E. (2011). Team leaders and team
members in interorganizational networks: An examination of structural holes and
performance. Communication Research, 38(5), 613–633.

Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1979). An integrative theory of intergroup conflict. In W. G.
Austin, & S. Worchel (Eds.). The social psychology of intergroup relations (pp. 33–47).
Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole.

Takanashi, C., & Lee, K. J. (2019). Boundary spanning leadership, resource mobilisation,
and performance of university-industry R&D projects: A study in a Japanese uni-
versity. Technology Analysis & Strategic Management, 31(2), 140–154.

Taneva, S., Grote, G., Easty, A., & Plattner, B. (2010). Decoding the perioperative process
breakdowns: A theoretical model and implications for system design. International
Journal of Medical Informatics, 79(1), 14–30.

Tasselli, S., & Caimo, A. (2019). Does it take three to dance the tango? Organizational
design, triadic structures and boundary spanning across subunits. Social Networks, 59,
10–22.

Tawse, A., Patrick, V. M., & Vera, D. (2019). Crossing the chasm: Leadership nudges to
help transition from strategy formulation to strategy implementation. Business
Horizons, 62(2), 249–257.

D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378

18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0955
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0960
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0960
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0970
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0970
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0970
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0985
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0985
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0985
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0990
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0990
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0995
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0995
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf0995
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1000
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1000
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1390


Tepper, B. J. (2000). Consequences of abusive supervision. Academy of Management
Journal, 43, 178–190.

Tepper, B. J. (2007). Abusive supervision in work organizations: Review, synthesis, and
research agenda. Journal of Management, 33(3), 261–289.

Tetlock, P. E. (1999). Accountability theory: Mixing properties of human agents with
properties of social systems. In L. L. Thompson, J. M. Levine, & D. M. Messick (Eds.).
Shared cognition in organizations: The management of knowledge (pp. 117–137).
Mahwah, NJ, US: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.

Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008). Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and
happiness. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Thompson, J. D. (1967). Organizations in action: Social science bases of administrative
theory. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.

Tippmann, E., Scott, P., & Parker, A. (2017). Boundary capabilities in MNCs: Knowledge
transformation for creative solution development. Journal of Management Studies,
54(4), 455–482.

Turner, J. C. (1985). Social categorization and the self-concept: A social cognitive theory
of group behavior. In E. J. Lawler (Ed.). Advances of group processes. Greenwich, CT:
JAI.

Tushman, M. L., & Scanlan, T. J. (1981). Boundary spanning individuals: Their role in
information transfer and their antecedents. Academy of Management Journal, 24(2),
289–305.

Uitdewilligen, S., & Waller, M. J. (2018). Information sharing and decision-making in
multidisciplinary crisis management teams. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 39(6),
731–748.

van Bunderen, L., Greer, L. L., & van Knippenberg, D. (2018). When interteam conflict
spirals into intrateam power struggles: The pivotal role of team power structures.
Academy of Management Journal, 61(3), 1100–1130.

van Knippenberg, D. (2003). Intergroup relations in organizations. In M. West, D.
Tjosvold, & K. G. Smith (Eds.). International handbook of organizational teamwork and
cooperative working (pp. 381–399). Chichester, UK: Wiley.

Villado, A. J., & Arthur, W., Jr. (2013). The comparative effect of subjective and objective
after-action reviews on team performance on a complex task. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 98(3), 514.

Wageman, R. (2001). How leaders foster self-managing team effectiveness: Design
choices versus hands-on coaching. Organization Science, 12(5), 559–577.

Waldman, D. A., & Atwater, L. E. (1994). The nature of effective leadership and

championing processes at different levels in a R&D hierarchy. The Journal of High
Technology Management Research, 5(2), 233–245.

Wang, D., Waldman, D. A., & Zhang, Z. (2014). A meta-analysis of shared leadership and
team effectiveness. Journal of Applied Psychology, 99(2), 181–198.

Wang, G., Oh, I. S., Courtright, S. H., & Colbert, A. E. (2011). Transformational leadership
and performance across criteria and levels: A meta-analytic review of 25 years of
research. Group & Organization Management, 36(2), 223–270.

Weber, M. (1947). The theory of social and economic organizations. New York: Free Press.
Widmann, A., & Mulder, R. H. (2018). Team learning behaviours and innovative work

behaviour in work teams. European Journal of Innovation Management, 21(3),
501–520.

Yan, A., & Louis, M. R. (1999). The migration of organizational functions to the work unit
level: Buffering, spanning, and bringing up boundaries. Human Relations, 52(1),
25–47.

Yukl, G. (2006). Leadership in organizations (6th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson
Education.

Yukl, G. (2012). Effective leadership behavior: What we know and what questions need
more attention. Academy of Management Perspectives, 26(4), 66–85.

Zaccaro, S. J., & DeChurch, L. A. (2012). Leadership forms and functions in multiteam
systems. In S. J. Zaccaro, M. A. Marks, & L. A. DeChurch (Eds.). Multiteam systems: An
organizational form for dynamic and complex environments (pp. 253–288). New York,
NY: Taylor & Francis.

Zaccaro, S. J., Heinen, B., & Shuffler, M. (2009). Team leadership and team effectiveness.
In E. Salas, G. F. Goodwin, & C. S. Burke (Eds.). Team effectiveness in complex orga-
nizations: Cross-disciplinary perspectives and approaches (pp. 83–111). New York:
Routledge.

Zaccaro, S. J., Marks, M. A., & DeChurch, L. A. (2012). Multiteam systems: An organiza-
tional form for dynamic and complex environments. New York: Routledge.

Zaccaro, S. J., Rittman, A. L., & Marks, M. A. (2001). Team leadership. The Leadership
Quarterly, 12(4), 451–483.

Zhang, C., Wu, F., & Henke, J. W., Jr. (2015). Leveraging boundary spanning capabilities
to encourage supplier investment: A comparative study. Industrial Marketing
Management, 49, 84–94.

Zhu, J., Liao, Z., Yam, K. C., & Johnson, R. E. (2018). Shared leadership: A state-of-the-art
review and future research agenda. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 39(7),
834–852.

D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378

19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1545
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1545
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30840-3/rf1555


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

The Leadership Quarterly

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua

Review

Leader-follower transgressions, relationship repair strategies and outcomes:
A state-of-the-science review and a way forward
Olga Epitropakia,⁎, Ana B. Radulovicb, Ziya Etea, Geoff Thomasc, Robin Martinc
a Durham University Business School, UK
b Singidunum University, Serbia
cAlliance Manchester Business School, UK

A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords:
Leader transgressions
Follower transgressions
Relationship repair strategies
Apology
Forgiveness

A B S T R A C T

A growing body of literature has focused on transgressions in the workplace and more recently, with respect to
leader-follower relationships. Despite the important implications of leader and follower transgressions and re-
lationship repair for work outcomes, there has not been a systematic review that examines the broad spectrum of
leader and follower transgressions and most importantly adopts a dynamic relational process perspective. We
view transgressions as key events in leader-follower relationships that trigger re-evaluation of the relationship,
relationship repair processes and influence work outcomes. The purpose of this review is threefold. First, to
provide a state-of-the-science review of the growing literature. Second, to offer a critical analysis of leader and
follower transgressions in terms of conceptualization, methodological issues and theoretical underpinnings.
Third, to outline a research agenda addressing leader-follower transgressions, relationship repair processes and
outcomes based on relationship science.

Introduction

Relationship fractures and transgressions in the workplace have
received considerable attention in organizational research (e.g.,
Basford, 2014; Elangovan & Shapiro, 1998; Liden, Anand, & Vidyarthi,
2016; Olekalns, Barker, & Vogus, 2019). Transgression events threaten
workplace relationships and may cause irreparable damage and dis-
solution. A focal work relationship is that between a leader and a fol-
lower and transgression events in this context can potentially have
serious implications for work-related outcomes such as well-being,
engagement, performance, and retention (e.g., Basford, Offermann, &
Behrend, 2014; Byrne, Barling, & Dupré, 2014; Krantz, 2006; Shapiro,
Boss, Salas, Tangirala, & Von Glinow, 2011; Stouten & Tripp, 2009).

Prior integrative research on workplace transgressions has focused
on work relationships in general (Ferris et al., 2009; Liden et al., 2016;
Olekalns et al., 2019) and has offered important insights on relational
processes such as relationship resilience and trust repair (e.g., Kramer &
Lewicki, 2010). However, there has been limited emphasis on the
leader-follower dyad and the specific implications of leader-follower
transgressions. The implicit assumption underlying previous general
reviews is that leader-follower relations are similar to other relation-
ships in organizational contexts and that any general insights can also

be applied to the leadership domain. Given the abundance of studies
focusing on relationship-based leadership perspectives (for a review see
Epitropaki, Martin, & Thomas, 2017; Martin, Epitropaki, Erdogan, &
Thomas, 2019), with Leader-Member Exchange (LMX) being the second
most prolific research area in the leadership domain (e.g., Bauer &
Erdogan, 2015), such an assumption downplays the complexity of
leader-follower relationships. We argue that leader-follower transgres-
sions warrant special attention as there are some fundamental differ-
ences between leader-follower relationships and other workplace re-
lationships which we describe below.

The leader-follower relationship is characterized by power asym-
metries due to hierarchical status differences that can influence the
outcomes of the transgression and the relationship repair strategies
employed. Prior research on forgiveness has shown that the more
powerful the partner, the less likely it is for him/her to forgive (e.g.,
Fincham, Hall, & Beach, 2006) and the more likely it is for him/her to
seek revenge (e.g., Aquino, Tripp, & Bies, 2006). Also, leader-follower
relationships are characterized by high levels of interdependence
(Hollander, 1992; Thomas, Martin, Epitropaki, Guillaume, & Lee, 2013;
Tjosvold, 1989). The follower depends upon the leader for a wide range
of resources (such as affiliation, service, goods, money, information,
status) but also the leader depends upon the follower for resources such

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101376
Received 14 November 2018; Received in revised form 14 December 2019; Accepted 19 December 2019

⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: olga.epitropaki2@durham.ac.uk (O. Epitropaki), ziya.ete@durham.ac.uk (Z. Ete), geoff.thomas@manchester.ac.uk (G. Thomas),

robin.martin@manchester.ac.uk (R. Martin).

The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101376

Available online 10 January 2020
1048-9843/ © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

T

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/10489843
https://www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101376
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101376
mailto:olga.epitropaki2@durham.ac.uk
mailto:ziya.ete@durham.ac.uk
mailto:geoff.thomas@manchester.ac.uk
mailto:robin.martin@manchester.ac.uk
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101376
http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101376&domain=pdf


as high levels of performance (Wilson, Sin, & Conlon, 2010). Such high
interdependence has important implications for relationship main-
tenance acts following a transgression.

We are only aware of one major review that has focused on leader
transgressions (Krylova, Jolly, & Phillips, 2017) and no reviews that
address follower transgressions or, importantly, emphasize both lea-
dership and followership perspectives. Krylova et al. (2017) provided a
very good review of integrity-based transgressions and adopted mainly
a leader-centric view of transgressions. They specifically reviewed the
literature on leader's integrity-based wrongdoing and subsequent da-
mage to followers' trust and moral identity. In doing so, they synthe-
sized existing research on integrity-based wrongdoing with the ex-
perimental philosophy literature on moral cognition (e.g., Cushman,
2008). The aim of our review is to focus on a broad spectrum of
transgressions and adopt a relational lens in order to cast light on both
leader and follower transgressions, relationship repair strategies and
work-related outcomes.

We aim to make three key contributions: First, we critically review
existing definitions and typologies, discuss theoretical underpinnings,
address methodological issues and offer suggestions for increased de-
finitional clarity and methodological advancement. Second, we provide
a state-of-the-science review of the growing literature. We review ex-
isting research on both leader and follower transgressions, relationship
repair processes and outcomes, identify points of convergence and gaps
in the literature. Third, we outline a future research agenda by offering
an integrative process model of leader-follower transgressions, re-
lationship repair strategies, boundary conditions and outcomes based
on insights from the multidisciplinary literature on relationship science.
We try to uncover the nuances of the phenomenon of transgressions, its
dynamic and events-based nature and its implications for individual,
dyadic and group outcomes in organizational settings. We believe that
our review is timely and can significantly extend our understanding of
what happens when things go wrong in leader-follower relationships as
well as how (and under which conditions) the relationship can be re-
paired.

Conceptualization of leader and follower transgressions

Definitions and typologies

Interpersonal transgressions have been generally defined as “…
actions taken by others against a person that go beyond the limits of
normative social intercourse and, therefore, violate various social and
moral codes” (Jones, Moore, Schratter, & Negel, 2001, p. 234). In the
broad workplace relationships literature, in addition to ‘transgressions’
(e.g., Abrams, Travaglino, Marques, Pinto, & Levine, 2018; Shapiro
et al., 2011; van Houwelingen, van Dijke, & De Cremer, 2015), we find
similar terms such as ‘betrayals’ (e.g., Elangovan & Shapiro, 1998;
Kramer & Lewicki, 2010; Krantz, 2006; Reina & Reina, 2006), ‘offenses’
(e.g., Aquino, Tripp, & Bies, 2001) and ‘trust violations’ (e.g.,
Schweitzer, Hershey, & Bradlow, 2006) to denote actions that cause
harm to a potential victim (or victims) at work.

Leader transgressions have been defined similarly to interpersonal
transgressions as “leaders’ actions, at work, whose appropriateness is
questionable when judged by norms associated with workplace-related
policies, procedures, or practices and/or with codes of interpersonal
conduct” (Shapiro et al., 2011, p. 412). Basford (2014) further focused
on supervisor transgressions at work and defined them as “... super-
visor's actions in the workplace that are perceived to violate work
norms, including those relating to policies, procedures, practices, or
interpersonal conduct” (p. 81). Basford argued that examining super-
visor transgressions versus general leader transgressions is relevant due
to the unique nature of the supervisor-subordinate relationship. In his
view, employees will experience different interactions with leaders at
various hierarchical levels (Zaccaro & Marks, 1999) and thus the im-
plications of supervisory (i.e., direct manager's) transgressions will not

be the same as CEO or senior leaders' transgressions. Basford thus in-
directly acknowledged the complex and multi-level nature of leader
transgressions, but this is not reflected either in his definition or ty-
pology of transgressions. To the best of our knowledge, there does not
exist a separate definition of follower transgressions.

When it comes to specific transgression typologies, one of the ear-
liest categorizations of workplace transgressions (not necessarily fo-
cused exclusively on leaders), is that by Bies and Tripp (1996, 2004).
Namely, they suggested that workplace offenses can be categorized as:
(a) goal obstruction (e.g., actions obstructing an employee's achieve-
ments); (b) violation of rules, norms and promises (e.g., taking credit
for other's performance or ideas); and (c) status and power derogation
(e.g., hypercritical, over-demanding, harsh superiors). In the trust lit-
erature, there is a well-established distinction between competence- and
integrity-based trust violations or transgressions (Dirks, Kim, Ferrin, &
Cooper, 2011; Ferrin, Kim, Cooper, & Dirks, 2007; Kim, Cooper, Dirks,
& Ferrin, 2013; Kim, Dirks, Cooper, & Ferrin, 2006; Kim, Ferrin,
Cooper, & Dirks, 2004). Competence-based transgressions involve unin-
tentionally harming the followers due to the lack of knowledge, skills or
resources (Kim et al., 2004) whereas integrity-based transgressions entail
intentionally offending or inconveniencing followers because of self-
ishness, dishonesty or discrimination (Kim et al., 2006; Mayer, Davis, &
Schoorman, 1995).

In the leadership literature, Shapiro et al. (2011) offered a typology
of eight leader transgressions: (a) absenteeism/negligence of duty (e.g.,
the leader neglecting duties and/or being absent from the organization
during expected work hours); (b) verbal/physical abusiveness (e.g., the
leader shouting at employees or using offensive language); (c) dis-
crimination (e.g., the leader treating male and female followers differ-
ently); (d) favoritism (e.g., the leader defending preferred followers
when they break rules); (e) dishonesty (e.g., the leader lying on reports,
taking credit for other's achievements); (f) incompetence (e.g., the leader
not employing correct procedures while performing duties); (g) inter-
personal sabotage (e.g., the leader impeding followers' promotion to
secure their own position in department); and (h) miscellaneous. Shapiro
et al. (2011) further identified that more than half of the leader-
transgressors were just one or two hierarchical levels above the parti-
cipants and the most frequent type was dishonesty-related transgres-
sions.

Other typologies include the one by Basford (2014) who identified
eleven supervisory transgression types and further classified them on a
spectrum ranging from active to passive. Active transgressions were
considered those that the supervisor commits by intentionally behaving
in a certain way, such as performance criticisms and demeaning insults.
On the other side of the spectrum, passive supervisor transgressions are
those that arise from the lack of supervisor action, effort, or behavior,
such as undersupplied resources, and underprovided recognition.
Grover, Hasel, Manville, and Serrano-Archimi (2014) also classified
transgressions into two types, recoverable and unrecoverable. They gen-
erally classified competence-based transgressions as recoverable and
integrity-based transgressions as unrecoverable but further highlighted
the importance of acknowledging factors and conditions that allow for
recovery such as intentionality.

In the leadership literature, there are no specific typologies of fol-
lower transgressions, but we can borrow insights from the literature on
workplace deviance and counterproductive work behaviors. Robinson
and Bennett (1995) defined employee deviance as “… voluntary be-
havior that violates significant organizational norms and in so doing
threatens the well-being of an organization, its members, or both” (p.
556) and identified four types of deviance, two organization-focused,
i.e., production deviance (e.g., leaving early), property deviance (e.g.,
stealing from the company) and two interpersonal co-worker focused,
i.e., political deviance (e.g., gossiping about co-workers) and personal
aggression (e.g., verbal abuse). Gruys and Sackett (2003) have also
offered a taxonomy of eleven counterproductive work behaviors: (a)
theft and related behavior; (b) destruction of property; (c) misuse of

O. Epitropaki, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101376

2



information; (d) misuse of time and resources; (e) unsafe behavior; (f)
poor attendance; (g) poor quality work; (h) alcohol use; (i) drug use; (j)
inappropriate verbal actions; and (k) inappropriate physical actions. It
is important to note that the above typologies are not directly focused
on the leader-follower relationship. The transgression target is either
the organization in general (such as stealing from the company, leaving
early and wasting resources) or the co-workers (such as gossiping about
co-workers and blaming co-workers) and there is no explicit acknowl-
edgement that these are examples of deviance in leader-follower in-
teractions. However, subsequent empirical studies have explicitly
linked leadership with employee deviance behaviors (Mayer, Thau,
Workman, Van Dijke, & De Cremer, 2012; Park et al., 2019). For ex-
ample, Mitchell and Ambrose (2007) added supervisor-directed de-
viance to Bennett and Robinson's (2000) model and adapted their in-
terpersonal deviance items to indicate behaviors targeted against the
supervisor (instead of the co-worker). Other studies (e.g., van Gils, Van
Quaquebeke, van Knippenberg, van Dijke, & De Cremer, 2015) argued
that leaders serve as representatives for their organization and thus
follower organizational deviance can be viewed as leader-targeted.
Based on this literature, we argue that employee deviance typologies
can offer some general insights on the possible content of follower
transgressions.

We summarize all the above typologies in Table 1.
As it becomes evident from Table 1, when attempting to synthesize

these diverse typologies into a unified framework, three broad types of
leader-follower transgressions emerge: (a) transgressions violating the
existing task accomplishment and performance norms, such as in-
competence, absenteeism and negligence of duty which we classify as
task-focused transgressions; (b) transgressions violating norms of inter-
personal interaction and hurting a person's self-esteem, such as inter-
personal sabotage and verbal abuse, labeled person-focused transgres-
sions; and (c) transgressions which violate moral and ethical norms such
as dishonesty and discrimination, labeled ethics-focused transgressions.

Table 1 offers a comparison of existing typologies under this tri-
partite framework of task-, person- and ethics-focused transgressions.
As we can see in Table 1, there are inevitably overlaps and re-
dundancies among typologies. For example, Basford's (2014) category
of inequitable behavior encompasses Shapiro et al.'s (2011) dis-
crimination and favoritism themes. Shapiro et al.'s (2011) absenteeism/
negligence of duty category encompasses aspects of Basford's (2014)

undersupplied resources, since employees in both categories are not
provided with sufficient support. Furthermore, Basford's (2014) false
accusations contain elements of Shapiro et al.'s dishonesty and inter-
personal sabotage themes, as well as the categories of recognition and
unfair employment decisions. One difference between Shapiro et al.'s
(2011) categories of leader transgressions and Basford's (2014) cate-
gories of supervisor transgressions is that the category of leader in-
competence did not arise as a common theme in Basford's study. Basford
(2014) suggested that this discrepancy arose due to the change in the
focal transgressor - from the leader in general to the supervisor. We can
also see that some established typologies such as the competency vs.
integrity violations framework (Kim et al., 2004) do not include person-
focused transgressions i.e., behaviors that violate interpersonal norms
and ‘attack’ a person's self-concept and self-esteem.

We further observe that the power and hierarchical status differ-
ences characterizing leader-follower relationships become more evident
in certain transgression types than others. For example, performance
criticisms, undersupplied resources, underprovided recognition, unfair
employment decisions, favoritism and abuse of power are more likely to
be leader-based transgressions. On the other hand, transgression types
such as dishonesty and incompetence can equally apply to both leaders
and followers. Our tripartite framework offers a broad taxonomy for
both leader and follower transgressions and does not explicitly ac-
knowledge issues related to power or hierarchical status differences. We
nonetheless discuss such issues in detail in later sections where we
present our integrative framework (An integrative model of leader-
follower transgressions, relationship repair strategies and outcomes
from an interdependence theory perspective section) and most specifi-
cally in relation to the relationship repair strategies a transgressor or a
victim may employ after a transgression.

When reviewing past typologies, we also notice that attempts to
qualitatively differentiate between transgression types, such as Grover
et al. (2014)'s classification of transgression typologies into recoverable
(competence-based) and unrecoverable (integrity-based) mix boundary
conditions and attributional processes in the content of transgressions.
Recovery is not an inherent characteristic of the transgression type but
dependent upon the victim's attributions and the transgressor's beha-
vior. The exact same transgression (e.g., dishonesty) may be recover-
able if the victim makes, for example, an external attribution and/or the
transgressor engages in a relationship repair strategy such as an apology

Table 1
A classification of existing transgression typologies.

Existing typologies Task-focused Person-focused Ethics-focused

GENERAL
Robinson and Bennett (1995) • Production deviance • Personal aggression • Property deviance• Political deviance
Bies and Tripp (1996, 2004) • Goal obstruction • Violation of rules, norms and promises • Status and power derogation
Kim et al. (2004) • Competence-based trust violations • Integrity-based trust violations
Fraser (2010) • Performance issues• Unmet expectations• Ineffective leadership• Unwillingness to acknowledge

responsibility

• Structural issues

• Disrespectful behaviors• Communication issues •
Incongruence (of values)

LEADERSHIP SPECIFIC
Pina e Cunha, Campos e Cunha, and Rego

(2009)
• Silence• Organizational secrecy •

Indifference

• Separation• Distrust
• Dishonesty

Shapiro et al. (2011) • Absenteeism/negligence of duty• Incompetence •
Verbal or physical abusiveness

• Discrimination• Interpersonal sabotage
• Favoritism• Dishonesty

Basford (2014) • Performance criticisms• Undue demands• Undersupplied resources
• Demeaning insults• Inconsiderate treatment• Disregard of opinions• Underprovided recognition

• False accusations• Unfair employment decisions• Inequitable behavior• Inappropriate contextual selections
Grover et al. (2014) • Incompetence • Lack of caring• Interference •

Deception

• Abuse of power

O. Epitropaki, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101376

3



but it will be irrecoverable if no action is taken. Similarly, the dis-
tinction of active and passive transgressions offered by Basford (2014)
mixes intentionality and the attributional processes a victim will engage
into within the transgression content. This creates a ‘messy’ and con-
fusing picture of leader-follower transgressions.

The impression that a reader gets when reviewing existing typolo-
gies is that of continuously ‘re-inventing the wheel’ and although the
insights on the content of transgressions are valuable, they do not help
move the field forward towards addressing more interesting theoretical
questions and dynamic phenomena. We hope that our tripartite fra-
mework can offer an overarching framework of leader and follower
transgressions that future research can utilize to delve deeper into this
complex phenomenon.

The way forward on definitional issues

From the previous discussion it becomes evident that existing de-
finitions and typologies of transgressions adopt a narrow and static
view, a ‘slice in time’ lens of a complex temporally unfolding phe-
nomenon. Existing definitions (e.g., Shapiro et al., 2011) generally
define transgressions as leader actions that violate organizational norms
(such as workplace-related policies, procedures, or practices and/or
codes of conduct) but fail to capture: (a) the transgression content, i.e.,
whether the transgressions are task-, person- or ethics-focused; (b) the
relational nature of leader-follower transgressions. Past definitions
mainly view transgressions as actions that violate organizational norms
and do not acknowledge the importance of leader-follower relationship
norm violations; and (c) their event-based occurrence and dynamic
essence. Past definitions remain silent regarding the temporal nature of
transgressions. We define leader (follower) transgressions as leaders'
(followers') actions that violate the established task-focused, person-focused
or ethics-focused norms and expectations in the leader-follower relationship.
Transgressions are key events in a leader-follower relationship which diverge
from the stable or routine features of leader-follower interactions and trigger
re-evaluation of the relationship.

Transgressions represent critical incidents (Flanagan, 1954), nega-
tive events (Lavallee & Campbell, 1995), a jolt (Meyer, 1982), ‘dis-
continuous happenings’ (Morgeson, Mitchell, & Liu, 2015, p. 519) or a
shock in the leader-follower relationship and are thus far from routine
and continuous. Given their event-based occurrence, the transgression
event strength (Morgeson et al., 2015) is of importance. Characteristics
such as criticality (“is the transgression event of high severity?”), no-
velty (“is the leader or follower transgression a new and unexpected
occurrence?”) and disruption (“does the transgression involve a dis-
continuity in the leader-follower relationship? What behaviors need to
change due to the transgression? What relationship routines need to be
adjusted?”) need to be taken into account when studying leader-fol-
lower transgressions. Events of low severity, low novelty and low dis-
ruption are unlikely to even enter the potential victim's (leader or fol-
lower) awareness sphere and thus their implications for the leader-
follower relationship and organizational outcomes will be minimal. On
the other extreme, transgression events of high severity, high novelty
and high disruption are likely to be anchoring events (Ballinger &
Rockmann, 2010) in the leader-follower relationship. Anchoring events
are marked by extreme emotional and instrumental content, are en-
coded in autobiographical memory and have significant effects on the
individual, the relationship and work-related outcomes. Such high im-
pact transgression events can serve as anchors based on which sub-
sequent leader-follower exchanges and relational events will be eval-
uated.

On the other hand, events of high severity and disruption but low
novelty will imply some form of abusive supervision and destructive
leadership in general (e.g., Tepper, 2007). Thus, transgression event
novelty (or transgression frequency) can be a qualifying condition that
differentiates leader-follower transgressions as ‘discontinuous happen-
ings’ that diverge from routine leader-follower interactions (per our

previous definition) from abusive supervision, destructive leadership
(e.g., Schyns & Schilling, 2013) and toxic followership (e.g., Padilla,
Hogan, & Kaiser, 2007) phenomena where norm-violating behaviors
are routine and stable patterns of leader-follower interaction. Abusive
leadership is a broad literature that has been the topic of several re-
views (e.g., Mackey, Frieder, Brees, & Martinko, 2017; Martinko,
Harvey, Brees, & Mackey, 2013; Tepper, 2007) and falls beyond the
scope of this review.

In sum, our definition extends existing conceptualizations of leader-
follower transgressions by acknowledging that: (a) they can be quali-
tatively different in terms of task-, person- or ethics-focused content; (b)
they are fundamentally of a relational nature as they take place in the
context of leader-follower relationships; and (c) they are not static
‘snapshot’ phenomena but instead discontinuous events in the leader-
follower relationship that can trigger relationship re-evaluation pro-
cesses over time.

Relationship repair strategies

After addressing transgression content and definitional issues in the
previous section, we now shift the lens of our review to the relationship
repair strategies that leaders and followers can employ after a trans-
gression event.

Transgressor strategies

Prior literature on relationship conflict and trust repair (e.g. Lewicki
& Brinsfield, 2017; Ren & Gray, 2009) has mainly identified four
dominant strategies that transgressors can use in restoring damaged
relationships and trust: (a) offer accounts for a violation in an attempt to
deny, reduce, or explain their culpability; (b) offer an apology, (c) de-
monstrate concern for the victim, and (d) show penance. The role of the
transgressors in promoting (or impeding) prosocial transformation and
forgiveness through their actions has also been highlighted by Rusbult,
Olsen, Davis, and Hannon (2001). They defined amends as the trans-
gressor's inclination to accept responsibility for a transgression, offering
sincere apology and genuine atonement. Amends may exert beneficial
effects on victim cognition and emotion, thereby enhancing the prob-
ability of prosocial victim transformation. For example, by discussing
the incident in a concerned apologetic manner, the transgressor may
help the victim develop feelings of empathy, thereby promoting a more
positive emotional state, or may identify extenuating circumstances,
thereby promoting less malevolent attributions regarding the trans-
gressor's motives (Fincham, Paleari, & Regalia, 2002; McCullough et al.,
1998).

One of the common relationship repair strategies that has been
examined in the existing literature is the transgressor (mainly the
leader) offering an apology. Apology is defined as a statement by which
the offender acknowledges the transgression and asserts their respon-
sibility for it (Leunissen, De Cremer, Reinders Folmer, & van Dijke,
2013). As noted by Basford et al. (2014), apologies are a “forgiveness-
seeking strategy” (Waldron & Kelley, 2008, p. 112), and the most fre-
quently used technique when individuals pursue forgiveness (Kelley,
1998). Basford et al. (2014) provide two theoretical explanations as to
why apologies are effective in eliciting forgiveness and repairing re-
lationships. In Goffman's (1971) view, apologies enable offenders to
disassociate their bad self from their good self. Apologizing enables an
individual to detach the part of the self that is transgressive from the
part of the self that is regretful thus enabling the good self to be for-
given. Along with this “splitting of the self” theory (Goffman, 1971, p.
113), other theories provide arguments as to why apologies are often
viewed as effective image-restoration and relationship repair tactics.
According to correspondent inference theory (Jones & Davis, 1965),
victims make presumptions about offenders considering the extent to
which the transgression is under the offender's control and the extent to
which the offender benefits from it. By apologizing the offender may

O. Epitropaki, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101376

4



convey the message that the harm was not intentional, that its con-
sequences are also harming the offender, and that the offender merits
forgiveness. Even though these two theories differ in some respects,
they are aligned on the view that apology should facilitate forgiveness
(Basford et al., 2014).

In addition to being just a verbal expression of remorse, Grover,
Abid-Dupont, Manville, and Hasel (2019) observe that higher-quality
apologies involve empathy, acceptance of responsibility and compen-
sation in the form of penance (Fehr, et al.,2010). In their conceptual
model of leader-follower reconciliation, Andiappan and Treviño (2011)
identified sincere apology as a repair effort that leads to forgiveness.
This notion has been supported by meta-analytic evidence which im-
plies a strong link between apology and forgiveness (Fehr, Gelfand, &
Nag, 2010).

Victim strategies

Forgiveness is a rapidly growing area of research that holds promise
for understanding leader-follower relationship development after a
transgression (Fincham et al., 2006). Existing forgiveness con-
ceptualizations are quite diverse (e.g., Enright et al., 1996; Exline &
Baumeister, 2000; Finkel, Rusbult, Kumashiro, & Hannon, 2002) but
they share an important common feature, i.e., the assumption that
forgiveness is a complex transformational process, which involves
prosocial change regarding a transgressor on the part of the trans-
gression recipient. As McCullough, Fincham, and Tsang (2003) point
out “… nearly every theorist appears to concur that when people for-
give, their responses (i.e., thoughts, feelings, behavioral inclinations or
actual behaviors) towards a transgressor become more positive and/or
less negative” (p. 540). Maio, Thomas, Fincham, and Carnelley (2008)
further tested the idea that the process of forgiveness is intrinsically
different across diverse relationships and found important asymmetries
in associates of forgiveness across parent-child and parent-parent re-
lationships. They also pointed out that forgiveness is an evolutionary
adaptation that protects relationships and that unforgiveness is related
to avoidance behavior.

Scholars have begun to investigate forgiveness in organizational
contexts, including the notion of leader-follower forgiveness. In their

review, Cameron and Caza (2002) underline the power that forgiveness
has on individual and collective outcomes. In a similar vein, Caldwell
and Dixon (2010) argue that love, forgiveness and trust are the core
values of contemporary organizational leaders who strive to maximize
value for organizations while enabling employees to realize their full
potential. Fehr and Gelfand (2012) pointed to levels-of-analysis issues
when studying forgiveness in organizational settings and proposed the
concept of forgiveness climate which they defined as “… the shared
perception that empathic, benevolent responses to conflict from victims
and offenders are rewarded, supported and expected in organizations”
(p. 666). Along similar lines, Bies, Barclay, Tripp and Aquino (2016)
further argued that forgiveness must be studied as a multilevel phe-
nomenon, embedded in context, as “…a part of a system of inter-
connecting psychological, social, structural, and cultural relations” (p.
246).

Review of existing research

Procedure and general findings

Given the importance of leader-follower transgressions, we con-
ducted a detailed search of the leadership-related transgressions lit-
erature to assess the current state of the field. To identify publications
for inclusion in our review, we searched Web of Science and EBSCO
databases. The specific search keywords we used were “leader” or
“leadership” (“follower” or “followership”) ‘and’ one of the following
terms: “transgressions”, “betrayal”, “offenses”, “trust violations”, “re-
lationship repair”, “trust repair”, “forgiveness”, “apologies”, “amends”
and “revenge”. Our first search yielded 453 results. We then excluded
papers that were not written in the English language, conference pa-
pers, dissertations, books and book chapters. This second search yielded
399 papers. We then focused on papers published in the fields of psy-
chology (applied, social, multidisciplinary), business and management as
our emphasis is on leader-follower relationships in organizational
contexts. The result of this second step was 90 articles. We then read the
title, abstract and main content of each of these papers. This final step
revealed 67 relevant articles published since 2000 that have focused on
leadership and followership transgression-related constructs and it is

2

0 0 0

6

2

1

2

17

6

2

6

11

6

1

5

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Leader transgressions Follower trangressions Trust in leader repair Leadership and betrayal Forgiveness and leadership Apologies and leadership Amends and leadership Revenge and leadership

2000-2010 2011-Present

Fig. 1. Frequency count of articles containing leadership transgressions, follower transgressions, trust in leader repair, betrayal, forgiveness, apologies, amends and
revenge, in the article title or abstract in 10 year increments since 2000.

O. Epitropaki, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101376

5



evident that this number is rising (see Fig. 1). Interestingly, our search
did not yield any relevant papers prior to 2000. As can be seen in Fig. 1,
the majority of articles (19 articles) have adopted a leader-centric
perspective focusing mainly on leader transgressions whereas there is
only a very small proportion (6 articles) explicitly examining follower
transgressions. A substantial part of the literature has examined re-
lationship repair strategies, with forgiveness (17 articles) and apologies
(8 articles) being the two dominant streams. It also becomes evident
that there is a substantial growth of this literature in the last eight years
which we anticipate will continue.

In analyzing the literature, one of the first observations is that there
is a fragmentation of the leader-follower transgressions and the re-
lationship repair literatures. Transgressions and relationship repair
strategies have evolved as separate lines of research and there is limited
integration between the two streams. Researchers have either examined
leader-follower transgressions and their outcomes or relationship repair
strategies (such as apologies) and outcomes. Relatively few studies have
attempted to examine the dynamic relational process that unfolds after
a leader or follower transgression has taken place, the transgressor's and
the victim's actions and reactions and relationship outcomes (e.g.,
Byrne et al., 2014; Radulovic, Thomas, Epitropaki, & Legood, 2019).
This fragmentation becomes evident in the keyword co-occurrence
analysis we did as part of our review using VOS viewer (Van Eck &
Waltman, 2010, 2019). Fig. 2 visualizes the co-occurrence networks of
the most important terms extracted from the body of literature on
leader-follower transgressions we have reviewed and presented in
Fig. 1. In VOS Viewer, constructs are represented by their label and by a
circle. The size of the label and the circle of an item is determined by

the weight of the item. Lines between items represent links. The closer
two constructs are positioned to each other, the stronger their relat-
edness (van Eck & Waltman, 2019). In order to construct this visual
construct map, we utilized three pieces of information from the papers
included in this review: keywords, title and abstract.

As can be seen in Fig. 2, ‘transgressions’, ‘forgiveness’ and ‘apolo-
gies’ emerge as nodes with high co-occurrence frequencies but the
communication (or overlay) between these streams of literature is
limited (as is evident by the few lines connecting the two constructs and
by the different colors each node is represented). There is, thus, a need
for an integrative framework addressing the dynamic relational pro-
cesses underlying leader-follower transgressions in organizational en-
vironments.

We now proceed with a closer examination and a more detailed
discussion of the reviewed papers and summarize findings on Table 2.
Table 2 is structured around types of transgression (task-, person- or
ethics-focused), who the transgressor is (leader or follower), the
transgression target (individual, dyad, group or third party), relation-
ship repair strategies and outcomes.

A first observation from Table 2 is that the vast majority of trans-
gressions in the current literature are ethics-focused with most domi-
nant one that of dishonesty. Leader dishonesty transgressions included
deceiving followers, abusing their power, making promises while being
aware they cannot keep them, cheating, offering a bribe in order to
influence decision making, and many others. Ethics-focused transgres-
sions thus appear to dominate the existing literature.

Table 2 further confirms our VOS analysis finding of a disconnect
between research on transgression typologies and research on

Fig. 2. Keyword co-occurrence mapping of the leader-follower transgressions and relationship repair literature.

O. Epitropaki, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101376

6



relationship repair processes and outcomes. There are seven studies
examining leader ethics-based transgressions (mainly dishonesty), a
relationship repair strategy (apology) and outcomes together (i.e.,
Bagdasarov, Connelly, & Johnson, 2019; Byrne et al., 2014; Grover
et al., 2019; Grover & Hasel, 2015, 2018; Radulovic et al., 2019; Zheng,
van Dijke, Narayanan, & De Cremer, 2018) and one study examining a
task-focused transgression (incompetence), a relationship repair
strategy (penance) and outcomes (Dirks et al., 2011). The vast majority
of studies have examined the direct relationship between leader fol-
lower transgressions and outcomes.

Furthermore, none of the reviewed studies examined more than one
transgression type and a few studies asked participants to think of
leader transgressions in general without specifying the content. For
example, Shapiro et al. (2011) asked participants to “… think about a
leader in their employing organization who had done something that
caused them to feel disappointed in him/her as a leader due to actions
at work whose appropriateness was questionable” (p. 415) and then to

open-endedly describe what their leader had done. Shapiro et al. (2011)
content-coded these transgressions into the eight types presented in our
section on typologies. They subsequently found that leaders who were
perceived to be more competent and inspirational were less punitively
evaluated by employees for leader transgressions. LMX (i.e., leader-
follower relationship quality) was found to be a significant mediator.
Furthermore, employees who punitively evaluated their leaders were
more likely to have turnover intentions and to psychologically with-
draw from their organization. Similarly, Radulovic et al. (2019) in their
field studies asked participants to think of leader transgressions they
had experienced before completing the surveys. In their Study 3, they
asked participants to specifically think of the eight transgression types
proposed by Shapiro et al. (2011) before answering.

With regards to transgression target, the majority of studies presented
in Table 2 focus on the dyad (whether the follower has experienced a
transgression on behalf of the leader and vice versa) (Basford, 2014;
Shapiro et al., 2011; van Houwelingen et al., 2015) and few studies

Table 2
Overview of articles focusing on leader and follower transgressions, relationship repair strategies and outcomes.

Transgression types Transgressor Transgression
target

Relationship repair
strategies

Transgression outcomes Methodology Indicative papers

TASK-FOCUSED
Incompetence Leader Dyad/Group None Procedural fairness,

Harm severity,
Trustworthiness,
Trust

Experimental Haesevoets et al. (2016)

Leader Not specified None Discouragement,
Demotivation

Qualitative Thanem (2013)

Leader Group Penance Trusting intentions Experimental Dirks et al. (2011)
Leader Group Apology None Case-study Cels (2017)
Follower Dyad None Leader disciplinary behavior Critical incidents and

experimental
van Houwelingen et al.
(2015)

Follower Dyad None General trust,
Ability,
Benevolence,
Integrity

Experimental Wang and Murnighan
(2017)

Negligence of duty Leader Dyad None Ethical leadership perceptions,
LMX,
Moral reasoning

Experimental Tumasjan et al. (2011)

Leader Third-party None Evaluation,
Accrual,
Conferral

Experimental Abrams, Travaglino,
Randsley de Moura, and
May (2015)

Leader Dyad Perceptions of the leader as
being worthy of being followed,
stress

Experimental and survey Liborius (2017)

Follower Dyad None Followers' perceptions of the
leader's worthiness of being
followed,
Followers' OCB,
Followers' voice behavior

Experimental Liborius (2014)

PERSON_FOCUSED
Verbal abusiveness Leader Dyad None Subordinate injustice

perceptions
Critical incidents and
experimental

Liang et al. (2018)

Leader Third-party None Evaluations (friendliness,
likability, warmth,
approachability),
Inclusion (in the team in the
future),
Punitiveness/bonus
distribution,
Prototypicality accrual,
Conferral

Experimental Abrams et al. (2013)

Leader Dyad None Tolerance,
Condemnation,
Moral emotional responses,
Attributions to abusive
behaviors

Experimental Wang and Chan (2019)

Leader Dyad Forgiveness,
Diminished avoidance
and revenge

None Experimental and critical
incidents

Zdaniuk and Bobocel
(2015)

(continued on next page)

O. Epitropaki, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101376

7



focus on group-level (e.g., a CEO transgression towards the organiza-
tion or the leader taking credit for his/her work team ideas) (Dirks
et al., 2011; Karelaia & Keck, 2013). An explicit acknowledgement of
the transgression target can contribute to a more nuanced under-
standing of leader-follower transgressions by taking into account the
multi-faceted nature of the specific phenomena.

The role of transgression severity has been addressed in a few studies
(although not presented in Table 2). For example, offence severity has
been found to be an important determinant of punitive actions that
people are willing to impose on deviant leaders (Karelaia & Keck,
2013). Byrne et al. (2014) found that offence severity moderated the
positive association between leader apologies and follower's psycholo-
gical well-being. Furthermore, offence severity moderated the associa-
tion between leader apologies and their positive emotions and psy-
chological health. More recently, Grover et al. (2019) examined the
conditions under which apologies facilitate restoration of trust in the
leader-follower relationship. It was found that the impact of apologies
on forgiveness and subsequent trust depended on leaders' intentions
and the severity of the trust violation's outcomes. Transgression severity

is thus an important moderating variable that needs to be taken into
account in empirical investigations of leader-follower transgressions.

Finally, we could not find any longitudinal studies in the leader-
follower transgressions literature. Only Radulovic et al. (2019) used a
time-lagged design in one of their three studies to examine the med-
iating role of forgiveness in the relationship between LMX and follower
attitudes and subjective well-being. Thus, time and the temporal nature
of leader-follower transgression events have been completely ignored
by existing research.

Outcomes of leader and follower transgressions

With regards to outcomes, the articles examined a variety of out-
comes such as turnover intentions (Shapiro et al., 2011), psychological
withdrawal (Shapiro et al., 2011), trusting intentions (Dirks et al.,
2011), moral reasoning (Tumasjan, Strobel, & Welpe, 2011), attribu-
tions of blame (Bauman, Tost, & Ong, 2016), among others. From a
multilevel perspective, most of these outcomes can be positioned on the
individual (Shapiro et al., 2011) or dyadic level (Bauman et al., 2016)

Table 2 (continued)

Transgression types Transgressor Transgression
target

Relationship repair
strategies

Transgression outcomes Methodology Indicative papers

ETHICS_FOCUSED
Dishonesty Leader Dyad Apology Follower well-being Byrne et al. (2014)

Leader Group Apology Perceived integrity,
Willingness to risk

Critical incidents &
experimental

Bagdasarov et al. (2019)

Leader Dyad Apology Forgiveness,
Trust

Experimental Grover et al. (2019)

Leader Group None Punishment recommendation Experimental Karelaia and Keck (2013)
Leader Group None Evaluations (friendliness,

likability, warmth,
approachability),
Inclusion (in the team in the
future),
Punitiveness/bonus
distribution,
Prototypicality accrual,
Conferral

Experimental Abrams et al. (2013)

Leader Third-party None Transgression perceptions and
judgements of transgressor

Experimental Randsley de Moura and
Abrams (2013)

Leader Group None Punishment severity,
Punishment recommendation,
Attribution of blame

Experimental Bauman et al. (2016)

Leader Group None Ethical leadership perceptions Marquardt, Brown, and
Casper (2018)

Leader Dyad Forgiveness Relational effort,
Job satisfaction,
Subjective-well-being

Survey and experimental Radulovic et al. (2019)

Leader Group Forgiveness None Experimental Stouten and Tripp (2009)
Leader Dyad (Withholding)

forgiveness
Transgressor compliance Critical incidents,

autobiographical recall and
experimental

Zheng et al. (2018)

Leader Group Apology Forgiveness Case-study Grover and Hasel (2015)
Leader Group Apology Satisfaction with the leader Experimental Grover and Hasel (2018)
Follower Group None Disciplining employee behavior Experimental Desmet et al. (2015)
Follower Dyad None Leader disciplinary behavior Critical incidents and

experimental
van Houwelingen et al.
(2015)

Follower Group None Punishment severity,
Punishment recommendation,
Attribution of blame

Experimental Bauman et al. (2016)

Follower Group None General trust,
Ability,
Benevolence,
Integrity

Experimental Wang and Murnighan
(2017)

Follower Group None Perceived leader integrity and
benevolence,
Trust in leader

Experimental Shao (2019)

Discrimination Leader Third-party None Evaluation,
Accrual,
Conferral

Experimental Abrams et al. (2015)

Leader Group Apology None Case-study Cels (2017)

O. Epitropaki, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101376

8



and none of the studies has explicitly addressed group-level outcomes.
In a field study of 162 employees, Shapiro et al. (2011) found that
leaders who were perceived to be more competent and inspirational
were less punitively evaluated by employees for leader transgressions.
Furthermore, employees who punitively evaluated their leaders were
more likely to have turnover intentions and to psychologically with-
draw from their organization.

Abrams, Randsley de Moura, and Travaglino (2013) have examined
forgiveness as an outcome in situations of transgressive captains and
players in sports teams and tested the hypothesis that people forgive
serious transgressions by ingroup leaders but not by other group
members or outgroup leaders. Across five studies, they found evidence
for a double standard in evaluations of the transgressive targets. In-
group leaders were granted special license to transgress (transgression
credit). More recently, Abrams et al. (2018) once again found support
for the deviance credit hypothesis. Their studies showed that ingroup
leaders benefited from both accrual of prototypicality and conferral
(based on mere occupancy of the leadership role) of the right to depart
from existing norms. Zheng et al. (2018) have also examined forgive-
ness as an outcome and specifically argued that a victim's withheld (vs.
expressed) forgiveness promotes transgressor compliance when the
victim has low power, relative to the transgressor. In the case of high-
power victims there were high levels of compliance from the trans-
gressor, regardless of whether they expressed or withheld forgiveness.

Tumasjan et al.'s (2011) study examined ethical leadership per-
ceptions as an outcome of leader transgression and found social dis-
tance to moderate the extent to which leaders are perceived as ethical
after moral transgressions. They further found ethical leadership to
influence LMX. Karelaia and Keck (2013) examined punishments after
transgressions and found an interactive effect of deviance severity and
leader status on recommended and actual punishments. Leadership
status was found to protect its holders in the case of low-severity
transgressions but was a liability in the case of high-severity trans-
gressions. Bauman et al. (2016) also studied punishments and found
that people were less punitive when low-ranking transgressors imitated
high-ranking members of their organization (i.e., a trickle-down model
of transgression). However, imitation only reduced punishment when
the two transgressors (high- and low-ranking) were from the same or-
ganization, when the two transgressions were similar and when it was
unclear whether the high-ranking transgressor was punished. Wang and
Chan (2019) utilized moral licensing theory and found that when lea-
ders demonstrated prior unethical behaviors, followers, who were the
victims of the leaders' transgressions, felt liberated to act in transgres-
sive ways.

Regarding follower transgressions, our literature search yielded
only six articles that addressed follower transgressions and findings are
also summarized in Table 2. Desmet, Hoogervorst, and Van Dijke
(2015)'s studies looked at follower punishment and showed that in-
creased market competition made leaders' disciplining of ethical
transgressions contingent upon the transgression's instrumentality to
the organization. Leaders tended to punish the same ethical transgres-
sion less when it resulted in profit for the organization than when it
resulted in loss. van Houwelingen et al. (2015) examined whether
leaders may be unwilling to enforce moral norms and punish followers
because of a negative attitude towards these norms. Their studies
showed that leaders that construe norms on relatively low (i.e., con-
crete) levels are more likely to see norms as obstacles, whereas leaders
that construe moral norms on high (i.e., abstract) levels have a more
positive view of norms and are thus more willing to punish transgres-
sing followers. Wang and Murnighan (2017) also examined follower
punishment and uninvolved observers' trust in the leader. Their studies
showed that observers trusted leaders who administered large or
medium punishment more than leaders who administered no punish-
ment when transgressors deserved punishment. They also showed that
people trusted punishers more than non-punishers, but only when
punishers' motives were not personal revenge.

Shao (2019) examined leaders' expression of moral anger as an
outcome and tested two paths through which leader moral anger affects
follower trust: a character-based path and a relationship-based path.
The results from two experimental studies did not provide support for
the character-based path but provided some support for the relation-
ship-based path between leader moral anger and follower affective
trust. It becomes evident from Table 2 that the majority of studies ex-
amined leader's punishment of the transgressing follower as the main
outcome and that follower transgression outcomes are mainly on the
individual and dyadic level (the leader's behaviors or emotions towards
the transgressing follower). Once again, no group-level outcomes have
been examined. Wang and Murnighan (2017)'s study, however, has
looked at third-party reactions (uninvolved observers) and offers an
interesting extension beyond the leader-follower dyad. It is highly
problematic that the current literature totally overlooks the impact of
followers' transgressions on leader-specific outcomes or leaders' per-
ceptions of the leader-follower relationship. The leader's punishment of
the transgressing follower (which has been the main outcome ex-
amined) is still a follower-centric outcome. Existing research thus gives
the erroneous impression that leaders are impervious to followers'
transgressions. Recent research has called for a more interactional
perspective and highlighted the need to shift the focus and examine
follower influences on leader outcomes such as well-being (e.g., Wirtz,
Rigotti, Otto, & Loeb, 2017). Future research examining the impact of
follower transgressions on leaders' psychological states, behaviors and
attitudes can advance our understanding of the mutual interplay of
leader-follower transgression phenomena.

Relationship-repair strategies

In this section we review strategies for relationship repair from both
the transgressor (leader or follower) and victim (leader or follower)
perspective found in the reviewed studies. As can be seen in Table 2,
two key main strategies are observed. With regards to transgressor
strategies, ‘leader apologies’ are the main focus of existing studies.
When it comes to victim strategies, ‘forgiveness’ emerges as a key
strategy and an important relationship maintenance mechanism.

Transgressor strategies
In their survey-based study, Basford et al. (2014) investigated how

followers evaluate leader apologies and how these perceptions influ-
ence work-related outcomes. Specifically, they examined leader trust-
worthiness and its impact on subsequent leader apology, perceived
humility and perceived transformational leadership. This serial mul-
tiple mediation process, in turn, influenced trust in leader, satisfaction
with supervision, LMX relationship quality and organizational com-
mitment. Forgiveness was shown to mediate the link between leader
apology and the outcomes including LMX.

In another survey-based study, Byrne et al. (2014) found that leader
apologies had a positive impact on followers' psychological well-being
and emotional health, which was moderated by offence severity. Their
second study showed that leader apologies had a positive impact on
their own psychological well-being, positive emotional health and au-
thentic pride. Furthermore, the nature of transgression moderated the
link between leader apologies and leaders' positive emotions and au-
thentic pride, while offence severity moderated the association between
leader apologies and their positive emotions, psychological health, and
authentic pride (Byrne et al., 2014).

Cels (2017) investigated public apologies that corporate and gov-
ernment leaders made following organizational transgressions. Their
qualitative case-research showed that leaders use ethical leadership
strategies developed for the organizational context and adopt them to
the public context. In particular, the study identified four strategies that
leaders employ: “articulating values in relation to past and future”,
“defining the wrongdoing”, “constructing moral communities”, and
“differentiating responsibilities” (Cels, 2017, p. 759).

O. Epitropaki, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101376

9



In a similar vein, Grover and Hasel (2015) examined how leaders
recover following public revelations of their sexual indiscretions. Using
qualitative case-research, the authors found that the survival of a
scandal depended on several factors, including the extent to which the
indiscretion deviated from accepted norms, the extent to which the
behavior differed from leader's expressed values, the leader's power,
and whether the leader engaged in atonement. The connectedness of
these elements showed that atonement was possible if the behavior was
neither too severe nor beyond their character and the leader was
powerful enough. Drawing on this research, Grover and Hasel (2018)
examined how leader's ethical behavior outside of work impacts fol-
lower attitudes towards them. A scenario-based study showed that
ethical leaders are hurt by sex scandals more than unethical leaders,
and that meaningful apologies are fruitful for personal responsibility
but not for transgressions rooted in an official abuse of power.

Interestingly, Stouten and Tripp (2009) showed that following a
transgression, followers profit more from apologizing and asking for
forgiveness than leaders do. In two experiments using a social dilemma
context where the norm of equality was violated, they showed that
apologizing and asking for forgiveness led to less negative affect, more
forgiveness and less revenge for follower transgressors but not leader
transgressors. The authors explain these results by noting that leaders
and followers are held to different rules and fairness violations can be
tolerated from leaders but not from followers (Stouten & Tripp, 2009).

Victim strategies
More recently, scholars have begun to investigate forgiveness in

LMX relationships. Thompson and Simkins (2017) investigated the
impact of two distinct forgiveness motives, self-oriented and other-or-
iented, on LMX relationship quality. In the authors' view, self-oriented
forgiveness motive is rooted in self-interest and rational calculation
while other-related forgiveness motive is rooted in empathy and com-
passion for the offender. A field study involving undergraduate pro-
fessionals and a time-lagged study involving graduate professionals
from the USA found that high-quality LMX relationships and inter-
personal citizenship behavior can be enhanced by both types of for-
giveness motives. The authors further demonstrate that the link be-
tween forgiveness motive and LMX can be enhanced by one's
disposition. In particular, proactive personality enhanced the impact of
self-oriented forgiveness motive on LMX, and empathic concerns en-
hanced the impact of other-oriented forgiveness motive on LMX.

Drawing on the relationship science literature, Radulovic et al.
(2019) proposed and tested a model of forgiveness in LMX relation-
ships. A field study involving employees in various organizations in
both individualistic and collectivistic countries (i.e., UK, Australia,
Serbia, Greece) showed that higher quality LMX relationships led to
higher follower's job satisfaction and subjective well-being via greater
follower's forgiveness and subsequent follower's relational efforts (e.g.,
constructive communication). Furthermore, an experimental scenario
study involving undergraduate students showed that LMX positively
affected forgiveness and that forgiveness climate was a significant
moderator. Lastly, a time-lagged study involving working professionals
from the USA found that the indirect effect of LMX relationship quality
on follower outcomes was enhanced by forgiveness climate. In general,
their three studies elucidate the process of forgiveness in LMX re-
lationships and demonstrate that forgiveness can be used as a re-
lationship maintenance strategy that generates positive outcomes fol-
lowing a workplace transgression.

In summary, it becomes evident from the above discussion that
existing research has focused on a narrow repertoire of transgressor and
victim relationship repair strategies, namely apology and forgiveness.
Expanding the lens to include other relationship repair strategies such
as accounts and penance could offer valuable insights in the future. In
addition, prior research has been completely mute on whether leaders
engage in relationship repair strategies when they are themselves vic-
tims of follower transgressions. Do leaders employ forgiveness as a

relationship repair strategy, under which circumstances and with what
outcomes (follower, relationship and group-related)? This is an inter-
esting question for future research to tackle.

Theoretical underpinnings of the reviewed studies

Prior studies have utilized a wide range of theories to cast light on
leader and follower transgressions. Scholars such as Abrams et al.
(2013, 2018) have drawn from the idiosyncrasy credit theory of lea-
dership and social identity theory (e.g., Hogg, 2001) to address how in-
group prototypical leaders are granted ‘deviance credit’ by their fol-
lowers. Drawing from idiosyncrasy credit theory of leadership, Shapiro
et al. (2011) investigated the conditions under which leaders avoid
punitive evaluations for their offenses. Radulovic et al. (2019) utilized
social exchange and LMX theories to investigate forgiveness as a re-
lationship repair strategy and its positive outcomes. Karelaia and Keck
(2013) have used role schema theory to investigate the extent to which
deviance severity and perceived rights and responsibility of leaders
influence punitive actions directed at deviant leaders. Bauman et al.
(2016) have drawn on social learning theory and psychological theories
of blame to explain how unethical behavior by higher-ranking in-
dividuals modifies the ways in which people respond to lower-ranking
individuals who then commit the same offence. Stouten and Tripp
(2009) have drawn on equity theory and social dilemma research to
investigate the reactions of group members following the violation of
equality norm by either a leader or a follower. Zdaniuk and Bobocel
(2015) have used the insights from idealized influence leadership to
investigate whether leaders who nourish follower collective identity
enable forgiveness among employees. Drawing on deterrence theory,
Zheng et al. (2018) showed that withholding rather than expressing
forgiveness enables the victims to gain offender compliance when the
victim has low power compared to the offender. The framework of
ethical leadership is also widely used among scholars. For example, Cels
(2017) investigated how executives demonstrate ethical leadership
when public apologies are needed.

On the basis of the above discussion, the absence of a coherent
theoretical framework for examining leader-follower transgressions is
evident. We will later attempt to offer such an overarching theoretical
framework by drawing from Rusbult's (1980) interdependence theory
and relationship science.

Measurement and methodological issues

As can be seen in Table 2, a variety of methodologies have been
employed to study transgressions and relationship repair strategies such
as critical incident technique (Basford, 2014;Byrne et al., 2014; Shapiro
et al., 2011), interviews (Grover et al., 2014; Thanem, 2013), and surveys
(Byrne et al., 2014; Shapiro et al., 2011) whereas the vast majority of
studies have utilized experimental designs (e.g., Abrams et al., 2013;
Desmet et al., 2015; Dirks et al., 2011; Randsley de Moura & Abrams,
2013; Shao, 2019; Wang & Murnighan, 2017). Indeed, more than half of
the articles presented in Table 2 used experimental designs, most often
experimental vignette methodologies (EVM). This is not surprising
considering the fact that EVM has been a popular method in ethical
decision-making studies (e.g., Pierce, Aguinis, & Adams, 2000). EVM is
a suitable methodological approach to study leader-follower trans-
gressions as it allows for experimental control over the manipulated
antecedent and can offer important insights on the causal relationship
between transgressions and outcomes. Nonetheless, EVM has short-
comings and especially the lack of scenario realism and result gen-
eralizability have been raised as a major criticism. EVM can suffer from
limitations related to “hypothetical studies” (Lonati, Quiroga, Zehnder,
& Antonakis, 2018) that do not elicit actual behaviors as they do not
have real-world tradeoffs or payoffs (e.g., Antonakis, 2017). These in-
clude misrepresentation of self-report assessments, proneness to de-
mand effects and social desirability responses, among others. Aguinis

O. Epitropaki, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101376

10



and Bradley (2014) suggested that the realism can be improved if the
level of immersion of the participants increases. They suggested use of
audio, video and pictures as a way to increase the realism of leader-
follower vignettes. Also, virtual reality technology (VRT) is another
media type that can be used to present more immersive and realistic
vignettes. Lonati et al. (2018) also advised researchers using EVM to
employ “non-traditional stimulus materials, which can enhance the
psychological realism and the immersion in hypothetical experimental
environments” (p. 22). Another shortcoming of EVM is the threat of
omitting important variables, given that the number of variables that
can be manipulated and examined in an EVM study is small. This issue
becomes evident in the studies reviewed in Table 2 as all experimental
studies presented focus on one transgression type and a few trans-
gression outcomes or one relationship repair strategy and a few related
outcomes. Thus, such methodology cannot capture the complex, dy-
namic and multifaceted nature of leader-follower transgressions, re-
lationship repair strategies and outcomes in organizational settings.
EVM is still a useful methodology in this particular research domain as
it can offer insights on whether a causal relationship exists but cannot
help us understand how the leader-follower transgression processes
unfold over time.

To answer the second question, different methodologies need to be
employed. First, the use of sequential experiments, in which the pos-
tulated chain of cause-effect relationships is examined cumulatively in
separate experiments, can help to test process models and also alleviate
the problem of endogeneity bias (Antonakis, Bendahan, Jacquart, &
Lalive, 2010; Fischer, Dietz, & Antonakis, 2017). Second, longitudinal
multi-wave studies and latent growth model designs can be utilized to
explore transgression dynamics over time. Also, experience sampling
methodology and daily diary (ESM/DD) methods can be used to un-
derstand within-person processes (such as emotions after a transgres-
sion event) over time. Such methods have been widely used to study
dynamic within-person processes involving affect, behavior, workplace
events and transient phenomena in organizational settings (Fisher & To,
2012). A specific ESM approach that could be suitable for leader-fol-
lower transgressions research is event-contingent reporting which re-
quires study participants to provide a response each time a discrete
event of a particular type (in our case a leader or follower transgres-
sion) occurs. Despite its advantages such as ecological validity, ex-
amination of within-person phenomena and memory bias reduction,
ESM is not without limitations (Scollon, Kim-Prieto, & Diener, 2003).
Self-selections bias and sample attrition are important shortcoming as
the heavy demand placed on participants may bias the final sample
towards highly conscientious individuals. Reactivity may also be pro-
blematic for ESM studies as the repeated assessments may lead parti-
cipants to pay unusual attention to transgression incidents which may
unduly magnify the transgression effects.

Leadership research can further benefit from utilizing event-study
analysis methodologies commonly used in economics (e.g., Campbell,
Lo, & MacKinlay, 1997). Economists are often asked to measure the
effect of an economic event on the value of a firm and their event-study
analysis starts with a clear definition of the event of interest, identifi-
cation of the event window and subsequent choice of a ‘short horizon’
versus a ‘long horizon’ method of study (Kothari & Warner, 2008).
Leader-follower transgressions studies in applied settings need also to
clearly define the transgression event of interest and carefully choose
the transgression event window the study will examine.

Qualitative methodologies such as process studies can be further
utilized as they utilize ethnographic, discourse analysis and other
methods to uncover how and why things emerge, develop, grow, or
terminate over time (Langley, Smallman, Tsoukas, & Van de Ven,
2013). Narrative analysis (e.g., Clandinin, 2006; Elliot, 2005) can offer
an in-depth look at people's experiences of leader and follower trans-
gressions via their own stories and narratives. Such analyses can be
further supplemented by computer-aided text analysis (CATA) methods
that can enable the quantitative analysis of narrative data based on

word frequencies. CATA methods hold considerable promise for leader-
follower transgressions research due to its high internal, external and
construct validity but issues related to measurement error variance
need to be also addressed by prospective studies (McKenny, Aguinis,
Short, & Anglin, 2018).

As we also see in Table 2, field studies are generally rare (e.g., Byrne
et al., 2014; Radulovic et al., 2019; Shapiro et al., 2011) due perhaps to
the difficulty of obtaining organizational approval to study transgres-
sions. Field studies are also constrained by the lack of an established
measure of leader-follower transgressions that can be used in organi-
zational surveys. Despite the multiple typologies discussed in
Definitions and typologies section there is lack of a coherent framework
utilized in survey research and prior field studies mainly asked whether
transgressions have been experienced (without focusing on specific
types) (e.g., Radulovic et al., 2019). We believe that our tripartite
transgression framework (discussed in Definitions and typologies sec-
tion) offers a useful platform for the development of such a scale and for
a more systematic measurement of transgression phenomena in applied
research.

Furthermore, it is important to acknowledge the dyadic and at the
same time multilevel nature of leader-follower transgression phe-
nomena. Prior research has highlighted the misalignment of theory and
methodology examining such dyadic phenomena (Krasikova &
LeBreton, 2012) and the pseudo-unilaterality (i.e., failing to take into
account both members of the dyad perceptions and behaviors) pre-
vailing in existing research. We observe such pseudo-unilaterality in the
context of leader-follower transgressions research. Most studies mea-
sure victim (most often follower) perceptions of the transgressive in-
cident as well as their subsequent behaviors and outcomes whereas very
few studies additionally focus on the transgressor's perceptions and
behaviors after the event (e.g., engaging in some form of a relationship
repair strategy such as apology). Such an approach disregards the
fundamentally relational nature of leader-follower transgressions.
Transgressions are dyadic situations in the sense that they occur within
work relationships between individuals (leaders and followers) who are
primarily nested within dyads and further nested in higher level units
such as teams and organizations (Krasikova & LeBreton, 2012). Meth-
odologies such as the Actor-Partner Interdependence Model (APIM) as
well as One-With-Many (OWM) models can be useful in studying
leader-follower transgressions. Whereas APIM designs focus on unique
dyads that do not share members with other dyads, OWM designs focus
on dependent dyads in which multiple partners (e.g., followers) share a
focal person (e.g., a leader). In organizational contexts, we normally
encounter dependent leader-follower dyads and thus OWM models may
be more appropriate. Reciprocal OWM designs in particular consider
multiple perspectives on an interpersonal interaction or relationship
and provide a more complete picture of the multifaceted nature of re-
lational phenomena. Also, repeated measures OWM models can cast
light on how a leader-follower relationship is unfolding after a trans-
gression incident.

As a general comment, in all quantitative approaches discussed in
the previous sections, endogeneity issues need to be addressed.
Endogeneity refers to situations when a predictor variable is correlated
with the error term of the outcome variable (see Antonakis et al., 2010;
Hughes, Lee, Tian, Newman, & Legood, 2018). Endogeneity biases can
mainly result due to (a) omitted variables, (b) designs that do not take
account of simultaneity and (c) measurement errors (Hughes et al.,
2018; Podsakoff & Podsakoff, 2019). Endogeneity biases can potentially
render results uninterpretable (Antonakis, Bendahan, Jacquart, &
Lalive, 2014) and thus they need to be explicitly addressed. For ex-
ample, a cross-sectional study examining followers' perceptions of lea-
der's transgressions (predictor), a relationship repair strategy such as
forgiveness (mediator) and turnover intentions (outcome) would be
affected potentially by all three endogeneity biases. The cross-sectional
design cannot address causality and simultaneity, there will be mea-
surement error due to common method variance and followers'

O. Epitropaki, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101376

11



perceptions of the leaders' transgressions are likely to be influenced by a
series of exogenous variables such as their personality, Implicit Lea-
dership Theories, positive and negative affect and so forth. Randomized
control experiments are considered to be ‘the gold standard method’ for
estimating causal effects (e.g., Antonakis et al., 2014) and thus the
experimental designs that have been widely employed in leader-fol-
lower transgressions research (see Table 2) potentially help overcome
endogeneity issues. With regards to field studies, instrumental variables
can be used to combat endogeneity biases. Instrumental variables are
exogenous predictors (i.e., influencing but not being influenced by the
variables in the model) of an endogenous predictor. Examples of in-
strumental variables include individual differences (e.g., personality),
demographic or biological factors (e.g., sex, age), or geographic factors.
None of the studies we reviewed explicitly performed instrumental
variable analyses such as 2SLS and this is an important limitation of
existing research in this domain.

Leader and follower transgressions research can further advance by
borrowing methodologies from other scientific fields. For example,
agent-based modeling methodologies (Bonabeau, 2002), currently used
across various disciplines (such as finance, marketing, medical sciences,
and the social sciences), can potentially be utilized to capture the
complex, dynamic, interactive processes underlying leader-follower
transgression and relationship repair phenomena. Agent-based systems
modeling (ABSM) is a powerful simulation technique that allows re-
searchers to model phenomena in which multiple individuals (i.e.,
agents) situated in a social system (in our case leaders and followers)
influence one another through their interactions (Serban et al., 2015).
Specific events (such as a transgression incident) can be modelled and
the process of how lower-level interactions (such as those taking place
in a leader-follower dyad after a transgression) can yield higher-level
outcomes (such as team outcomes) over time can be captured (e.g.,
Acton, Foti, Lord, & Gladfelter, 2019). Grand, Braun, Kuljanin,
Kozlowski, and Chao (2016) state that the first step in an ABSM analysis
is “… a narrative theory of what individuals do, think, feel, that gives
rise to a higher level outcome.” (p. 1354). The integrated model we
present in An integrative model of leader-follower transgressions, re-
lationship repair strategies and outcomes from an interdependence
theory perspective section can provide the basis for such a narrative
theory of the leader-follower transgressions process that could poten-
tially be modelled in ABSM.

Finally, leader and follower transgressions research can borrow
methodologies from neuroscience. Prior neuroscientific research has
studied brain activation patterns in the process of forgiving and has
found specific brain areas to be associated with forgiveness and speci-
fically the left ventromedial prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate gyrus
and right temporo-parietal junction (Billingsley & Losin, 2017). Strang,
Utikal, Fischbacher, Weber, and Falk (2014) used fMRI methodology to
investigate brain processes involved in receiving an apology and active
forgiveness of an ambiguous offence. They found that receiving an
apology yielded activation in the left inferior frontal gyrus, the left
middle temporal gyrus, and left angular gyrus and that forgiving
judgments activated the right angular gyrus. Although neuroscience
research on transgression-related topics and forgiveness remains in its
infancy, the scope for future research clarifying the neural mechanisms
underlying transgression and relationship repair mechanisms is vast.

Theoretical integration and future research directions

In previous sections, we reviewed existing literature on leader-fol-
lower transgressions, relationship repair strategies and outcomes and
critically discussed the current state of the particular research domain
with regards to its definitional, theoretical and methodological chal-
lenges. The need for a unified theoretical framework that can help
capture the dynamic relational process of transgressions and repair
processes over time became evident. Below we offer an integrative

model that synthesizes the existing literature and utilizes insights from
Rusbult's (1980) interdependence model as its theoretical foundation.

Interdependence theory and insights from relationship science

Theory and research from the multidisciplinary literature on re-
lationship science (otherwise referred to as close or personal relation-
ships, see Berscheid, 1999) can enhance our understanding of re-
lationship maintenance processes in leader-follower relationships
following a transgression. While some distinctions between personal
and workplace relationships exist, there is arguably sufficient overlap
for cross-fertilization (e.g., Loignon, Gooty, Rogelberg, & Lucianetti,
2019; Mayseless, 2010; Thomas, Martin, Epitropaki, et al., 2013). For
example, both close non-work and leader-follower relationships are
typified by mutual influence, high trust, reciprocal liking, coordinated
goals, responsiveness, and the provision of various kinds of resources
and support (see Thomas, Martin, Epitropaki, et al., 2013). In addition,
the relationship science literature emphasizes a number of generic re-
lationship maintenance strategies that could be fruitfully generalized
across virtually all kinds of relationships (Berscheid, 1999; Martin,
Epitropaki, Thomas, & Topakas, 2010).

Interdependence theory is the central theoretical framework in re-
lationship science and in a similar vein to LMX theory it is guided by the
logic of social exchange and reciprocity (Epitropaki, Martin, & Thomas,
2017). Rusbult's (1980) investment model stems from interdependence
theory and its central principle is that dependence on the relationship is
a function of both the extent to which the relationship meets the in-
dividual's most important needs and the quality of alternatives for sa-
tisfying such needs. Dependence in turn leads to relationship commit-
ment which is enacted by both parties adopting maintenance strategies
to ensure that the relationship is perpetuated at the desired level
(Rusbult, 1980). The investment model broadly differentiates between
two forms of relationship maintenance mechanisms: cognitive and be-
havioral. Cognitive maintenance strategies serve to diminish the ne-
gative impact of transgressions on relationship perceptions and can be
likened to a first line of defence against relational damage. The cogni-
tive approach treats relationship transgressions as, in part, socially
constructed, and thus as much in the eye of the beholder as in the be-
havior of the beheld (Thomas, Martin, & Riggio, 2013). In contrast,
behavioral maintenance strategies are more effortful and involve either
the inhibition of destructive behavior or the promotion of constructive
behavior in response to transgressions. Behavioral maintenance tactics
are more likely to be needed in the face of serious relationship trans-
gressions that cannot be easily condoned or explained away (e.g.,
ethics-focused transgressions).

It is important to note that the literature on leader-follower trans-
gressions has largely overlooked the role of cognitive maintenance
strategies. Here we briefly review three kinds of cognitive maintenance
tactics (for a more detailed discussion, see Maio & Thomas, 2007). First,
people can idiosyncratically interpret the transgression in ways that
enables them to maintain a positive view towards the leader-follower
relationship. For example, Murray and Holmes (1993) found that os-
tensibly negative behavior (e.g., adversarial and judgmental) can be
interpreted as positive behavior (e.g., willingness to be a straight talker
and confront important issues), and that this flexible reinterpretation
can help to maintain relationship perceptions over time. That said, the
relabelling of transgressions is likely to be psychologically taxing, and
in the case of serious offenses may not be always possible without ap-
pearing misguided (Maio & Thomas, 2007).

Second, it may be possible to recast the transgression by considering
it in the broader context of other positive behavior. This tactic of re-
integration is akin to saying, “Yes, but…”. In other words, the trans-
gression is acknowledged but offset by desirable characteristics. Murray
and Holmes (1993) provide examples of such integrative thinking in
their research on close relationships. Couples were asked to write

O. Epitropaki, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101376

12



narratives describing both the development of their relationship and
their partners' greatest faults which revealed many serious character
flaws (and implied transgressions). Nevertheless, the significance of
such faults was downplayed by integrating them with compensatory
virtues, and the capacity to engage in such integrative thinking pre-
dicted greater relationship stability. Based on this logic, those people
who cognitively cluster transgressions and compensatory positive be-
havior together may more effectively maintain leader-follower re-
lationships than those who cluster them separately (Murray & Holmes,
1999).

Finally, it may be possible to reconstrue the transgression by attri-
buting it to a benign cause that diminishes the transgressor's responsi-
bility for the offence. This tactic of reattribution can be likened to
saying “Yes, because…”. For example, research on close relationships
reveals that some people attribute their partner's most egregious be-
haviors (e.g., jealous rages; controlling behavior) to important virtues
(e.g., loving; caring). People can also discount such behavior by attri-
buting it to some temporary, external causal factor. Indeed, such con-
genial attributions can result from in-depth cognitive processing in
which people consider the extent to which the perpetrator transgresses
in different situations and across time (Hovland, Janis, & Kelley, 1953).

In contrast, the literature on transgressions in leader-follower re-
lationships has paid some attention to the role of behavioral main-
tenances strategies. In line with the investment model, and as reviewed
above, there is growing recognition that certain behavioral tactics used
by both the transgressor (e.g., apology) and the victim (e.g., forgive-
ness) can be effective in repairing the leader-follower relationship. Here
we highlight the role of accommodative behavior, a victim-instigated
relationship maintenance strategy that has received considerable at-
tention in the relationship science (but not the leadership) literature
(e.g., Fletcher, Thomas, & Durant, 1999; Rusbult, Verette, Whitney,
Slovik, & Lipkus, 1991). In the context of relationship transgressions,
accommodative behavior represents the willingness to restrict the urge
to reciprocate in kind and instead to respond constructively.

Theory and research on behavioral accommodation is rooted in the
investment model and the exit-voice-loyalty-neglect typology of re-
lationship conflict (e.g., Rusbult et al., 1991). According to this ty-
pology, the four possible responses to a transgression can be dis-
tinguished on the basis of two dimensions: activity vs. passivity and
destructiveness vs. constructiveness. Exit reactions are actively de-
structive (e.g., retaliation; seeking revenge; terminating the relation-
ship), whereas voice reactions are actively constructive (e.g., con-
structive dialogue; adopting a problem-solving approach). Loyalty
reactions are passively constructive (e.g., minimising or shrugging of
the problem; patiently waiting for progress) whereas neglect reactions
are passively destructive (e.g., stonewalling; disengaging from the re-
lationship) (Rusbult et al., 2001). The good manners model of re-
lationship conflict suggests that it is less important that people display
constructive behaviors, rather that they do not display destructive be-
haviors due to the disproportionately harmful effect of destructive acts
(Gottman, 1998). Thus, behavioral accommodation helps maintain re-
lationships by ‘nipping problems in the bud’, and in doing so it prevents
a downward spiral of negative reciprocity that is destructive to re-
lationships.

As discussed earlier, a central principle the investment model is that
of partner dependence which in turn leads to relationship commitment
and the adoption of relationship maintenance strategies (Rusbult,
1980). Applying this logic to leader-follower relationships there are
good reasons to believe that followers should be more motivated to
maintain the relationship than leaders. First, leaders typically have
better access to important resources (e.g., money, information, status)
than followers, and therefore followers are likely to be more dependent
on leaders than leaders are on followers. Second, given that a leader has
many followers but followers only have one leader, a leader has dis-
proportionate access to alternative relationships for meeting his/her
needs. Hence, if a follower routinely transgresses, rather than undertake

the psychologically difficult process of repairing the relationship, a
leader could transfer this investment to an alternative (more rewarding)
follower. Followers, by contrast, are in essence ‘stuck’ with the leader.
The upshot of this discussion is that leader-follower relationships are
likely to be more important to followers than to leaders, and thus fol-
lowers should be more inclined to engage in maintenance strategies
than leaders.

An integrative model of leader-follower transgressions, relationship repair
strategies and outcomes from an interdependence theory perspective

Let us now examine what happens after a leader or follower trans-
gression event has taken place. From an interdependence perspective
(e.g., Rusbult & van Lange, 2003), in the aftermath of a transgression,
the victim (whether the leader or a follower) may find it difficult to
depart from the negative affect associated with the incident. When
victims experience negative transgressor-directed emotions, such as
anger, a reduced motivation to engage in relationship repair strategies
can be expected. Conversely when victims experience positive trans-
gressor-directed emotions such as empathy, an enhanced motivation to
forgive can be expected (Worthington Jr., 2006). Reconciliation fol-
lowing a significant transgression entails mutual investment, whereby
both partners exert significant, coordinated effort to achieve a desired
end state, i.e. restored dyadic functioning. Critical in the process is the
pre-transgression relationship commitment (Rusbult et al., 2001). Ac-
cording to Finkel et al. (2002) strong commitment promotes positive
mental events, pro-relationship motives and forgiveness. A second
component of commitment involves long term orientation and for-
giveness might be a conscious or unconscious means of maximizing
long-term self-interest. A third component of commitment involves
broadened interpersonal interests. In committed relationships, the
motives of self and partner may become compatible to the extent that
departures from self-interest benefitting the partner are not experienced
as antithetical to self-interests (e.g. Agnew, Van Lange, Rusbult, &
Langston, 1998). Commitment may thus inspire other-oriented actions
that benefit the relationship, and therefore the self.

In order to understand leader-follower transgressions and relation-
ship repair processes we propose an integrative model in the leader-
follower relationship context. This model is presented in Fig. 3.

Guided by Rusbult's investment model (Rusbult et al., 2001), as well
as the research of Fehr et al. (2010), we propose that victims' prosocial
motivation transformations occur via (a) mitigating cognitions regarding
transgressions and transgressors; (b) positive rather than negative af-
fect; and (c) relational, dispositional and situational boundary condi-
tions for relationship repair. For the process to begin, the transgression
must first enter awareness, i.e. one member of the dyad to realize that
the other has violated the relationship norms. This is an important stage
that does not follow the same pattern for leaders and followers. As
recent research on employee deviance has highlighted, leaders may be
less accurate when assessing workplace mistreatment or even unable to
detect it due to limited and screened information (e.g., Kluemper,
Taylor, Bowler, Bing, & Halbesleben, 2019).

Affective reactions
After the transgression enters awareness, the initial reaction is often

one of shock, repression and denial (e.g., Enright et al., 1996). The
injured dyad member often feels deluged with mixed emotions such as
hurt, anger, anxiety and sadness. The empirical literature reveals that
following transgressions, victims experience diverse negative emotions
and emotional reactions vary as a function of the nature of the dyadic
relationship. Reactions generally tend to be more negative in highly
committed relationships (Finkel et al., 2002; Rusbult et al., 2001).

Cognitions
According to attribution theory (e.g., Heider, 1958; Kelley, 1973)

relationship repair strategies such as forgiveness emanate from a

O. Epitropaki, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101376

13



victim's perception that the transgressor and offence are decoupled -
that the offence was not an act of volition but rather a product of cir-
cumstance. If a victim makes internal, global and stable attributions of a
transgression (e.g., “My manager committed this offense because he/
she is untrustworthy, no matter the situation, and isn't going to
change”) he/she may be more likely to react negatively towards the
transgressor. In contrast, external, specific and unstable attributions
(e.g. “My employee committed this offense because he/she got put in a
bad situation and won't do it again”) might be more likely to lead to
positive behaviors towards the transgressor (Hall & Fincham, 2006).

In the dyad context, relational attributions are also likely to occur
(Eberly, Holley, Johnson, & Mitchell, 2011). Victims (leaders or fol-
lowers) based on their relationship history will make relational attri-
butions about the cause of a transgression event within the relationship
(e.g., “my manager took credit for my work because we don't have a
good relationship”). Eberly et al. (2011) argued that relational attri-
butions lead to relational uncertainty and anxiety. Thus, dyad members
will be more likely to proactively seek to repair their relationship
through relationship repair strategies when they make relational attri-
butions than when they make individual attributions as the ones we
described earlier.

Boundary conditions
In our model we highlight a series of boundary conditions that are

likely to affect cognitive and affective reactions to a transgression in-
cident. First, transgression event criticality or severity is of importance.
The effects of transgression severity have been examined in many close
relationship studies (e.g., Fincham, Jackson, & Beach, 2005;
McCullough et al., 2003; McCullough & Hoyt, 2002). Bradfield and
Aquino (1999) showed that blame attributions were influenced by of-
fence severity. Furthermore, it was shown that a global information

processing style increases willingness to forgive by making the offence
appear less severe (Mok & De Cremer, 2015). Perceived severity of the
critical incident significantly predicted whether or not a victim engaged
in forgiveness (Beattie & Griffin, 2014). Fehr et al. (2010)'s meta-ana-
lysis found severity and forgiveness to be negatively correlated. Offence
severity has also been found to be an important determinant of punitive
actions that people are willing to impose on deviant leaders (Karelaia &
Keck, 2013). Byrne et al. (2014) found that offence severity moderated
the positive association between leader apologies and follower's psy-
chological well-being. Furthermore, offence severity moderated the
association between leader apologies and their positive emotions and
psychological health. More recently, Grover et al. (2019) examined the
conditions under which apologies facilitate restoration of trust in the
leader-follower relationship. It was found that the impact of apologies
on forgiveness and subsequent trust depended on leaders' intentions
and the severity of the trust violation's outcomes. Transgression severity
is thus an important boundary condition that needs to be taken into
account into empirical investigations of leader-follower transgressions.

Second, transgression event novelty or frequency needs to be taken
into account. As discussed in The way forward on definitional issues
section, transgression frequency can distinguish transgressions that are
novel, non-routine ‘discontinuous happenings’ in a leader-follower re-
lationship from phenomena where norm-violating behaviors are routine
and stable patterns of interaction such as abusive supervision (e.g.,
Schyns & Schilling, 2013) and toxic followership (e.g., Padilla et al.,
2007).

Third, the transgressor's hierarchical status is an important boundary
condition, i.e., whether the transgressor is the leader or the follower.
Prior research has highlighted the role of the hierarchical status for
forgiveness. Aquino et al. (2006), for example, argued that victims will
not seek vengeance when the power dynamics of the situation make the

Relationship repair 
strategies

Leader

Follower

Relationship

Relationship quality

Hierarchical status
Individual differences

Schemas

Hierarchical status
Individual differences

Schemas

Transgression
Type

Target
Severity

Frequency

POST-TRANSGRESSION

Relational attributions
Relationship re-evaluation

PRE-TRANSGRESSION TRANSGRESSION 
EVENT

Relationship resilience

Cognitions
Emotions

Cognitions
Emotions

Relationship repair 
strategies

Fig. 3. An integrative process model of leader-follower transgressions, relationship repair strategies and outcomes.

O. Epitropaki, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101376

14



costs of doing so too high and that a victim may find it more ad-
vantageous to maintain a relationship with a high-status transgressor
than with a low-status transgressor, thus motivating prosocial coping
responses and discouraging revenge. Given that a transgressor of a
higher hierarchical status can more negatively impact the victim than a
lower hierarchical status transgressor “… due to the fact that the former
may influence desired outcomes (e.g., pay, promotion opportunities,
access to social networks), the victim may refrain from pursuing re-
venge because he or she fears the loss of these outcomes” (p. 54). They
also suggested that people with higher hierarchical status may find it
particularly insulting to be harmed by a lower status follower so they
may believe that an aggressive response is necessary to enforce social
deference. Forgoing the opportunity to enact retaliation would be to
relinquish the opportunity to demonstrate their superior power. Thus,
those in a more powerful position are likely to be less motivated to
forgive, whereas those with less power may be more inclined to forgive
(Fincham et al., 2006).

Kramer (1999) also investigated trust-enhancing and trust-de-
creasing behaviors as a function of where people were at in the hier-
archical ladder in the organization. The results showed that because of
their greater dependence and vulnerability, trust concerns were
stronger for individuals in low-status positions. Interestingly enough,
Zheng et al. (2018) found that an apology (vs. no apology) from high-
power transgressors was relatively ineffective in increasing forgiveness
from low-power victims and this moderating effect was mediated by
victim cynicism.

Fragale, Rosen, Xu, and Onypchuk (2009) focused on subjective
rather than hierarchical status and found that transgressor's status af-
fected attributions for the transgression incident and specifically ob-
servers attributed higher intentionality to high- relative status trans-
gressors rather than low-status transgressors (see also Heider, 1958). In
the case of high intentionality attributions, one would expect less in-
clination for observers to forgive. It is, however, important to note that
there was no relational dependency or a hierarchical relationship be-
tween transgressor and observers in their study. Observers were not
relying on the transgressor for valuable resources and rewards and this
may well explain the differential results.

Finally, the pre-transgression quality of the leader-follower re-
lationship is likely to be an important boundary condition in this con-
text as we expect the relationship repair process to be different in the
case of high versus low quality leader-follower relationships. High
quality leader-follower relationships are characterized by high levels of
dependence, commitment and relationship satisfaction and thus leaders
and followers in such relationships will be more inclined to make
benevolent attributions of the event and to show pro-relationship
transformation motivation and reach forgiveness (e.g., Radulovic et al.,
2019). Committed and satisfied partners tend to attribute negative ex-
periences to transient and external sources and even in the face of de-
clining relationship quality they maintain optimism (e.g., Bradbury &
Fincham, 1990; McCullough et al., 1998). Thus, in leader-follower re-
lationships of high quality, transgression victims will generally tend to
make benevolent attributions and attribute the transgressor's behavior
to more uncontrollable, transient, external sources, view transgressions
as more incidental, and the transgressor as less responsible for the
transgression. In contrast, victims in low quality leader-follower re-
lationships (i.e. low commitment, low investment and low satisfaction)
will tend to make distress-maintaining, malevolent attributions and
view transgressions as more internal, permanent and under the control
of the transgressor, and thus more likely to ascribe intentionality and
culpability.

As can be seen in Fig. 3, after the stage of transgression awareness
and relevant cognitions and emotions, the next stage involves trans-
gressor behaviors that can contribute towards the relationship repair
process. Transgressors (leaders or followers) can engage in a series of
behaviors in order to address the transgression. The role of the trans-
gressors in promoting (or impeding) prosocial transformation and

forgiveness through their actions has been highlighted by Rusbult et al.
(2001). Transgressor's relationship repair strategies such as an apology
are likely to promote positive affect and thus create the conditions for
prosocial transformation of motivation, whereas lack of relationship
repair action is likely to induce negative affect. Also, regarding victim
cognitions, at this stage, after having acquired more information about
the factors contributing to the transgression, injured parties may begin
to develop revised explanations for their partner's behavior. Enright
et al. (1996) in their theory of forgiveness refer to a strategy entitled
“re-contextualizing” the transgressor, meaning that the injured partners
can reconstrue the transgression by placing the act in the broader
context of the relationship and environment. Acknowledging the con-
text might cast light on the partner's decision to engage in the betrayal.
For example, organizational crisis conditions might explain why a
leader didn't grant a promised reward to a member or fear for one's job
security might explain a verbal outburst and snapping incident on be-
half of the member. Maio and Thomas (2007) describe this process as
akin to the victim saying “Yes, but…” or “Yes, because…” Taking into
account the surrounding conditions, the good history of the relation-
ship, or the transgressor's otherwise good character can alleviate the
sense of transgression.

Alternatively, negative framing may also occur, which can accent-
uate the sense of transgression. For example, reflecting upon one's pre-
existing knowledge of the relationship, especially past transgressions
may heighten the perception of injury or harm. Putting the event in
context and changing the attributions for the event can result in a new
understanding of oneself, one's partner and the relationship. In the final
stage of the relationship repair process, both leader and follower have
ascribed meaning into what has happened, strong emotions have sub-
dued and are ready to act on what happened. Victims can now choose
one of three behavioral strategies to react: (a) grant forgiveness; (b) opt
for some form of retribution, i.e. some form of revenge or punishment
(e.g., a leader can fire a member for a violation or a member can stop
putting extra effort in his/her work); and (c) opt for refuge. Whereas
restitution and retribution are in some fashion “making up for” the
transgression, refuge is more a demand for protection or proof that the
event will not happen again (Baucom & Epstein, 1990). Refuge might
involve either an emotional or physical distancing from a hurtful
partner “They hurt me once, so I will not let them get close enough to
hurt me again”.

The role of individual variables
Certain individual variables will enhance or inhibit victims' ten-

dencies to engage into relationship repair strategies such as forgiveness.
Prior meta-analytic work on forgiveness in close relationships has
highlighted the role of three dispositional variables; agreeableness, trait
forgiveness or forgivingness and perspective-taking (Fehr et al., 2010).
Among the Big 5 personality factors, agreeableness is most frequently
linked to forgiveness. It is defined as the tendency to get along well with
others. When faced with a conflict event, agreeable people seek co-
operative and integrative solutions and are also likely to understand
and empathize with others' situations (Ashton, Paunonen, Helmes, &
Jackson, 1998). Trait forgiveness is conceptualized as the tendency for
an individual to forgive across situations and time (Berry, Worthington,
Parrott, O'Connore, & Wade, 2001). Individuals high on trait forgive-
ness tend to interpret offenses as worthy of forgiveness whereas those
low on trait forgiveness tend to interpret offenses as unworthy of for-
giveness and perceive retribution or refuge as the most useful strategy.

Perspective taking represents a cognitive capacity to consider the
point of view of another person (Davis, 1983). Within the context of
forgiveness, perspective taking has been shown to enhance victims'
understanding of why the transgressors might have offended them and
facilitate prosocial transformation of motivation (Fehr et al., 2010).
Furthermore, prior research (e.g., Exline, Baumeister, Bushman,
Campbell, & Finkel, 2004) has highlighted the role of narcissistic enti-
tlement for forgiveness. Narcissistic entitlement involves expectations of

O. Epitropaki, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101376

15



special treatment and preoccupation with defending one's rights. In-
dividuals high in narcissistic entitlement have been found to be less
willing to forgive and more skeptical of forgiving in general. In fact,
Exline et al. (2004) have reported narcissistic entitlement to be a ro-
bust, distinct predictor of unforgiveness.

Schemas, such as Implicit Leadership and Followership Theories
(e.g., Epitropaki, Sy, Martin, Tram-Quon, & Topakas, 2013; Lord,
Epitropaki, Foti, & Hansbrough, 2019) can also play a role in re-
lationship repair processes. A victim (follower or leader) may be more
willing to forgive a transgressor who matches their leadership (or fol-
lowership) prototype as prototypical transgressors enjoy ‘deviance
credit’ and license to transgress (e.g., Abrams et al., 2018). Relational
schemas may also be important (Baldwin, 1992) in this context. Prior
research (e.g., Huang, Wright, Chiu, & Wang, 2008) has shown that
leaders and members form different relational schemas. Leaders de-
velop schemas focused on work-related issues whereas members are
focusing more on interpersonal concerns. These differential schemas
may trigger a different evaluation process of observed transgressions
(e.g., leaders may be more tuned to task-focused transgressions and
followers to person-focused ones) with implications for subsequent re-
lationship repair processes.

Outcomes at three levels of analysis
We expect a series of possible outcomes of the relationship repair

process of a transgression based at three levels of analysis (individual,
dyadic, and group). Specifically, on the individual level, possible fol-
lower outcomes may include reduced turnover intentions and psycho-
logical withdrawal (Shapiro et al., 2011), well-being and positive
emotion (Byrne et al., 2014; Radulovic et al., 2019), fairness percep-
tions (Liang et al., 2018), moral identity (Krylova et al., 2017) and
follower OCB and voice (Liborius, 2014). From the leader's perspective,
possible individual outcomes include perceived leader integrity and
trust in the leader (Shao, 2019) and moral identity salience (Krylova
et al., 2017) following relationship repair. Other possible outcomes that
have not been examined by prior research include leader efficacy and
leader identity. For example, after effective resolution of a transgression
event, leaders may experience renewed granting of their leader identity
(DeRue & Ashford, 2010) and increased confidence in their ability to
lead. Leaders may also experience negative individual outcomes such as
diminished power base, lower leader identity and efficacy and social
rejection (e.g., Freedman, Burgoon, Ferrell, Pennebaker, & Beer, 2017)
and increased employee deviance (license to transgress-trickledown
effect).

After follower transgressions, followers may experience punitive
and authoritarian leadership behaviors and transactional (versus socio-
emotional) exchanges with the leader. However, if the leader grants
forgiveness it is possible for the relationship to return to pre-trans-
gression levels of outcomes in terms of follower well-being, job sa-
tisfaction, follower identity and leader trust.

Relationship resilience is a key outcome of a relationship repair
process after a transgression. Relationship resilience is demonstrated
when leaders and followers restore their relationship to the status quo
or exhibit positive adaptation and growth after the transgression (e.g.,
Murray & Holmes, 1999; Olekalns et al., 2019). Other dyadic outcomes
may include increased relational effort (Radulovic et al., 2019), and
relational trust (Olekalns et al., 2019) as well as enhanced leader-fol-
lower relationship quality. Furthermore, given that leader-follower
dyads are nested in groups, group-level outcomes may occur. Group-
level outcomes may include forgiveness climate (Fehr & Gelfand, 2012),
justice climate (Colquitt, Noe, & Jackson, 2002) and group perfor-
mance. For sake of parsimony, we do not present all possible outcomes
in Fig. 3 apart from relationship resilience which is fundamental for
relationship continuance.

Transgression antecedents and triggers. Although not explicitly presented
in our model in Fig. 3, future research could also identify specific

transgression event triggers and antecedents. For example, prior
research in the close relationship literature has shown that
attachment orientations predicted transgression frequency and
reactions towards a partner's transgression (Martin, Hill, & Allemand,
2019). Specific transgression event triggersmay also be identified such as
uncertain environmental conditions, organizational changes and
performance pressures (Mitchell, Baer, Ambrose, Folger, & Palmer,
2018) or ego depletion factors (e.g., Barnes, Schaubroeck, Huth, &
Ghumman, 2011).

Other future directions. As previously discussed, time is generally an
important parameter that needs to be explicitly conceptualized and
operationalized (e.g., Day, 2014). Time is a key factor for experiencing
a transgression in a relationship, for relationship repair and relationship
outcomes in the aftermath of the transgression. Generally,
transgressions early in a relationship can be damaging (e.g., Lewicki
& Bunker, 1996; Lount Jr., Zhong, Sivanathan, & Murnighan, 2008) in
the sense that the relationship might never recover as relationship-
norms have not been fully established. On the other hand,
transgressions that happen later in established relationships can yield
deeper damage than if the violation occurred earlier before
relationships were formed and commitments made (e.g., Tomlinson,
Dineen, & Lewicki, 2004). In these circumstances, the violation is a
shock and it is worse than unreliability or deception because it violates
a deep trust and confidence in a longer-term relationship (Glovier,
1998).

Identity is also a promising line of research in the context of leader-
follower transgressions relationship repair strategies and outcomes.
Krylova et al.'s (2017) review has already offered an identity perspec-
tive utilizing social identity (e.g., Hogg, 2001), moral identity (Aquino
& Reed II, 2002) and identity threat (Petriglieri, 2011) theories. They
argued, for example, that when leaders transgress and behave in a
manner that is incompatible with prototypical group attributes, they
are redefining the group prototype. The ambiguity created by the
transgression creates a discord between the leaders' behavior and the
followers' moral identities which can be identity threatening. We fur-
ther argue that transgressions can have implications for leader and
follower identities (Epitropaki, Kark, Mainemelis, & Lord, 2017;
Epitropaki, Martin, & Thomas, 2017), leader efficacy and follower self-
concepts. Trickle down effects of transgressive behaviors, similar to
ethical (e.g., Mayer, Kuenzi, Greenbaum, Bardes, & Salvador, 2009) or
abusive leadership (e.g., Mawritz, Mayer, Hoobler, Wayne, & Marinova,
2012) can also be examined. For example, a middle manager who is the
victim of their leader's transgressions may then emulate similar trans-
gressive behaviors in their relationships with their own followers.

In sum, we believe that we have offered an integrative model and a
broad future research agenda that the interested researcher may find
useful when conducting research in the field of leader-follower trans-
gressions, relationship repair strategies and outcomes.

Conclusion

Recently there has been considerable research focusing on leader
and follower transgressions and relationship repair strategies. In this
review, we have critically synthesized this growing literature, discussed
conceptual and methodological challenges, offered suggestions for de-
finitional clarity, added new insights based on closed relationship sci-
ence perspectives and outlined an integrative framework for guiding
new directions of research in this field. Addressing relational trans-
gressions between leaders and followers can be a challenging process.
However, the utilization of relationship repair strategies can have a
transformative effect on the leader-follower relationship through re-
defining relationship norms and boundaries. Multiple outcomes on the
individual, dyadic and group levels for both leaders and followers can
be expected to follow the relationship repair process. We consider this
an exciting field of study and we hope that future research will

O. Epitropaki, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101376

16



empirically integrate transgressions, relationship repair strategies and
outcomes as well as explicitly address their events-based nature, their
complex unfolding over time, boundary conditions and levels-of-ana-
lysis issues.

References

Abrams, D., Randsley de Moura, G., & Travaglino, G. A. (2013). A double standard when
group members behave badly: Transgression credit to ingroup leaders. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 105, 799–815.

Abrams, D., Travaglino, G. A., Marques, J. M., Pinto, I., & Levine, J. M. (2018). Deviance
credit: Tolerance of deviant ingroup leaders is mediated by their accrual of proto-
typicality and conferral of their right to be supported. Journal of Social Issues, 74(1,
SI), 36–55.

Abrams, D., Travaglino, G. A., Randsley de Moura, G., & May, P. J. (2015). A step too far?
Leader racism inhibits transgression credit. European Journal of Social Psychology, 44,
730–735.

Acton, B., Foti, R., Lord, R., & Gladfelter, J. (2019). Putting emergence back in leadership
emergence: A dynamic, multilevel, process-oriented framework. The Leadership
Quarterly, 30, 145–164.

Agnew, C. R., Van Lange, P. A. M., Rusbult, C. E., & Langston, C. A. (1998). Cognitive
interdependence: Commitment and the mental representations of close relationships.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 939–954.

Aguinis, H., & Bradley, K. J. (2014). Best-practice recommendations for designing and
implementing experimental vignette methodology studies. Organizational Research
Methods, 17, 351–371.

Andiappan, M., & Treviño, L. K. (2011). Beyond righting the wrong: Supervisor-sub-
ordinate reconciliation after an injustice. Human Relations, 64, 359–386.

Antonakis, J. (2017). On doing better science: From thrill of discovery to policy im-
plications. The Leadership Quarterly, 28, 5–21.

Antonakis, J., Bendahan, S., Jacquart, P., & Lalive, R. (2010). On making causal claims: A
review and recommendations. The Leadership Quarterly, 21, 1086–1120.

Antonakis, J., Bendahan, S., Jacquart, P., & Lalive, R. (2014). Causality and endogeneity:
Problems and solutions. In D. V. Day (Ed.). The Oxford handbook of leadership and
organizations (pp. 93–117). New York: Oxford University Press.

Aquino, K., & Reed, A., II (2002). The self-importance of moral identity. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 83(6), 1423–1440.

Aquino, K., Tripp, T. M., & Bies, R. J. (2001). How employees respond to personal offense:
The effects of blame attribution, victim status, and offender status on revenge and
reconciliation in the workplace. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 52–59.

Aquino, K., Tripp, T. M., & Bies, R. J. (2006). Getting even or moving on? Power, pro-
cedural justice, and types of offense as predictors of revenge, forgiveness, re-
conciliation, and avoidance in organizations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91,
653–668.

Ashton, M. C., Paunonen, S. V., Helmes, E., & Jackson, D. N. (1998). Kin altruism, re-
ciprocal altruism, and the big five personality factors. Evolution and Human Behavior,
19, 243–255.

Bagdasarov, Z., Connelly, S., & Johnson, J. F. (2019). Denial and empathy: Partners in
employee trust repair? Frontiers in Psychology, 10.

Baldwin, M. W. (1992). Relational schemas and the processing of social information.
Psychological Bulletin, 112, 461–484.

Ballinger, G. A., & Rockmann, K. W. (2010). Chutes versus ladders: Anchoring events and
a punctuated-equilibrium perspective on social exchange relationships. Academy of
Management Review, 35, 373–391.

Barnes, C. M., Schaubroeck, J., Huth, M., & Ghumman, S. (2011). Lack of sleep and
unethical conduct. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 115,
169–180.

Basford, T. E. (2014). Supervisor transgressions: A thematic analysis. Leadership and
Organization Development Journal, 35, 79–97.

Basford, T. E., Offermann, L. R., & Behrend, T. S. (2014). Please accept my sincerest
apologies: Examining follower reactions to leader apology. Journal of Business Ethics,
119, 99–117.

Baucom, D. H., & Epstein, N. (1990). Brunner/Mazel cognitive therapy series. Cognitive-
behavioral marital therapy. Brunner/Mazel.

Bauer, T., & Erdogan, B. (Eds.). (2015). The Oxford handbook of leader-member exchange.
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.

Bauman, C. W., Tost, L. P., & Ong, M. (2016). Blame the shepherd not the sheep: Imitating
higher-ranking transgressors mitigates punishment for unethical behavior.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 137, 123–141.

Beattie, L., & Griffin, B. (2014). Day-level fluctuations in stress and engagement in re-
sponse to workplace incivility: A diary study. Work & Stress, 28, 124–142.

Bennett, R. J., & Robinson, S. L. (2000). Development of a measure of workplace de-
viance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 85(3), 349–360.

Berry, J. W., Worthington, E. L., Parrott, L., O’Connore, L. E., & Wade, N. G. (2001).
Dispositional forgivingness: Development and construct validity of the transgression
narrative test of forgivingness (TNTF). Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27,
1277–1290.

Berscheid, E. (1999). The greening of relationship science. American Psychologist, 54,
260–266.

Bies, R. J., & Tripp, T. M. (1996). Beyond distrust: “Getting even” and the need for re-
venge. In R. M. Kramer, & T. Tyler (Eds.). Trust in organizations (pp. 246–260).
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Bies, R. J., & Tripp, T. M. (2004). The study of revenge in the workplace: Conceptual,
ideological, and empirical issues. In S. Fox, & P. Spector (Eds.). Counterproductive

workplace behavior: An integration of both actor and recipient perspectives on causes and
consequences (pp. 65–82). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Bies, R. J., Barclay, L. J., Tripp, T. M., & Aquino, K. (2016). A systems perspective on
forgiveness in organizations. The Academy of Management Annals, 10(1), 245–318.

Billingsley, J., & Losin, E. A. R. (2017). The neural systems of forgiveness: An evolu-
tionary psychological erspective. Frontiers in Psychology, 8, 737.

Bonabeau, E. (2002). Agent-based modeling: Methods and techniques for simulating
human systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 99(3), 7280–7287.

Bradbury, T. N., & Fincham, F. D. (1990). Attributions in marriage: Review and critique.
Psychological Bulletin, 107(1), 3–33.

Bradfield, M., & Aquino, K. (1999). The effects of blame attributions and offender like-
ableness on forgiveness and revenge in the workplace. Journal of Management, 25,
607–628.

Byrne, A., Barling, J., & Dupré, K. E. (2014). Leader apologies and employee and leader
well-being. Journal of Business Ethics, 121, 91–106.

Caldwell, C., & Dixon, R. D. (2010). Love, forgiveness, and trust: Critical values of the
modern leader. Journal of Business Ethics, 93, 91–101.

Cameron, K., & Caza, A. (2002). Organizational and leadership virtues and the role of
forgiveness. Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies, 9, 33–48.

Campbell, J., Lo, A., & MacKinlay, A. C. (1997). The econometrics of financial markets.
Princeton University Press.

Cels, S. (2017). Saying sorry: Ethical leadership and the act of public apology. The
Leadership Quarterly, 28, 759–779.

Clandinin, D. (2006). Handbook of narrative inquiry. Newbery, CA: Sage.
Colquitt, J. A., Noe, R. A., & Jackson, C. L. (2002). Justice in teams: Antecedents and

consequences of procedural justice climate. Personnel Psychology, 55, 83–109.
Cushman, F. (2008). Crime and punishment: Distinguishing the roles of causal and in-

tentional analyses in moral judgment. Cognition, 108(2), 353–380.
Davis, M. H. (1983). Measuring individual differences in empathy: Evidence for a mul-

tidimensional approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 44(1), 113–126.
Day, D. V. (2014). Time and leadership. In A. J. Shipp, & Y. Fried (Vol. Eds.), Time and

work. Vol. 2. Time and work (pp. 30–52). New York: Psychology Press.
DeRue, D. S., & Ashford, S. J. (2010). Who will lead and who will follow? A social process

of leadership identity construction in organizations. The Academy of Management
Review, 35(4), 627–647.

Desmet, P. T. M., Hoogervorst, N., & Van Dijke, M. (2015). Prophets vs. profits: How
market competition influences leaders’ disciplining behavior towards ethical trans-
gressions. The Leadership Quarterly, 26, 1034–1050.

Dirks, K. T., Kim, P. H., Ferrin, D. L., & Cooper, C. D. (2011). Understanding the effects of
substantive responses on trust following a transgression. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 114, 87–103.

Eberly, M. B., Holley, E. C., Johnson, M. D., & Mitchell, T. R. (2011). Beyond internal and
external: A dyadic theory of relational attributions. Academy of Management Review,
36, 731–753.

Elangovan, A. R., & Shapiro, D. L. (1998). Betrayal of trust in organizations. Academy of
Management Review, 23, 547–566.

Elliot, J. (2005). Using narrative in social research: Qualitative and quantitative approaches.
London: Sage.

Enright, R. D., & The Human Development Study Group (1996). Counseling within the
forgiveness triad: On forgiving, receiving forgiveness, and self-forgiveness. Counseling
and Values, 40, 107–126.

Epitropaki, O., Kark, R., Mainemelis, C., & Lord, R. G. (2017). Leadership, followership
and identity processes: A multilevel review. The Leadership Quarterly, 28, 104–129.

Epitropaki, O., Martin, R., & Thomas, G. (2017). Relational leadership. In J. Antonakis, &
D. V. Day (Eds.). The nature of leadership (pp. 109–137). Thousand Oakes: Sage.

Epitropaki, O., Sy, T., Martin, R., Tram-Quon, S., & Topakas, A. (2013). Implicit leader-
ship and followership theories “in the wild”: Taking stock of information-processing
approaches to leadership and followership in organizational settings. The Leadership
Quarterly, 24, 858–881.

Exline, J. J., & Baumeister, R. F. (2000). Expressing forgiveness and repentance: Benefits
and barriers. In M. E. McCullough, K. I. Pargament, & C. E. Thoresen (Eds.).
Forgiveness: Theory, research, and practice (pp. 133–155). New York: Guilford Press.

Exline, J. J., Baumeister, R. F., Bushman, B. J., Campbell, W. K., & Finkel, E. J. (2004).
Too proud to let go: Narcissistic entitlement as a barrier to forgiveness. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 894–912.

Fehr, R., & Gelfand, M. J. (2012). The forgiving organization: A multilevel model of
forgiveness at work. Academy of Management Review, 37, 664–688.

Fehr, R., Gelfand, M. J., & Nag, M. (2010). The road to forgiveness: A meta-analytic
synthesis of its situational and dispositional correlates. Psychological Bulletin, 136,
894–914.

Ferrin, D. L., Kim, P. H., Cooper, C. D., & Dirks, K. T. (2007). Silence speaks volumes: The
effectiveness of reticence in comparison to apology and denial for responding to in-
tegrity-and competence-based trust violations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92,
893–908.

Ferris, G. R., Liden, R. C., Munyon, T. P., Summers, J. K., Basic, K. J., & Buckley, R. M.
(2009). Relationships at work: Toward a multidimensional conceptualization of
dyadic work relationships. Journal of Management, 35, 1379–1403.

Fincham, F. D., Jackson, H., & Beach, S. R. H. (2005). Transgression Severity and
Forgiveness: Different Moderators for Objective and Subjective Severity. Journal of
Social and Clinical Psychology, 24(6), 860–875.

Fincham, F. D., Hall, J., & Beach, S. R. H. (2006). Forgiveness in marriage: Current status
and future directions. Family Relations, 55, 415–427.

Fincham, F. D., Paleari, G., & Regalia, C. (2002). Forgiveness in marriage: The role of
relationship quality, attributions and empathy. Personal Relationships, 9, 27–37.

Finkel, E. J., Rusbult, C. E., Kumashiro, M., & Hannon, P. (2002). Dealing with betrayal in
close relationships: Does commitment promote forgiveness? Journal of Personality and

O. Epitropaki, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101376

17

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0285


Social Psychology, 82, 956–974.
Fischer, T., Dietz, J., & Antonakis, J. (2017). Leadership process models: A review and

synthesis. Journal of Management, 43, 1726–1753.
Fisher, C. D., & To, M. L. (2012). Using experience sampling methodology in organiza-

tional behavior. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 33, 865–877.
Flanagan, J. C. (1954). The critical incident technique. Psychological Bulletin, 51,

327–358.
Fletcher, G. J. O., Thomas, G., & Durant, R. (1999). Cognitive and behavioral accom-

modation in close relationships. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 16,
705–730.

Fragale, A. R., Rosen, B., Xu, C., & Onypchuk, I. (2009). The higher they are, the harder
they fall: The effects of wrongdoer status on observer punishment recommendations
and intentionality attributions. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
108, 53–65.

Fraser, W. L. (2010). Trust violation and repair: An exploration of the views of work group
members. Doctoral dissertationSanta Barbara, California: Fielding Graduate
University.

Freedman, G., Burgoon, E. M., Ferrell, J. D., Pennebaker, J. W., & Beer, J. S. (2017). When
saying sorry may not help: The impact of apologies on social rejections. Frontiers in
Psychology, 8, 1375.

Glovier, T. (1998). Dilemmas of Trust. Montreal, Canada: McGill-Queens University Press.
Goffman, E. (1971). Relations in public: Microstudies of the public order. New York: Basic

Books.
Gottman, J. M. (1998). Psychology and the study of the marital processes. Annual Review

of Psychology, 49, 169–197.
Grand, J. A., Braun, M. T., Kuljanin, G., Kozlowski, S. W. J., & Chao, G. T. (2016). The

dynamics of team cognition: A process-oriented theory of knowledge emergence in
teams. Journal of Applied Psychology, 101, 1353–1385.

Grover, S. L., Abid-Dupont, M. A., Manville, C., & Hasel, M. C. (2019). Repairing broken
trust between leaders and followers: How violation characteristics temper apologies.
Journal of Business Ethics, 155, 853–870.

Grover, S. L., & Hasel, M. C. (2015). How leaders recover (or not) from publicized sex
scandals. Journal of Business Ethics, 129, 177–194.

Grover, S. L., & Hasel, M. C. (2018). The ironic double whammy of being an ethical
leader: Follower response to leader infidelity. Management, 21, 1032–1049.

Grover, S. L., Hasel, M. C., Manville, C., & Serrano-Archimi, C. (2014). Follower reactions
to leader trust violations: A grounded theory of violation types, likelihood of re-
covery, and recovery process. European Management Journal, 32, 689–702.

Gruys, M. L., & Sackett, P. R. (2003). Investigating the dimensionality of counter-
productive work behavior. International Journal of Selection and Assessment, 11,
30–42.

Haesevoets, T., Joosten, A., Reinders Folmer, C., Lerner, L., De Cremer, D., & Van Hiel, A.
(2016). The impact of decision timing on the effectiveness of leaders’ apologies to
repair followers’ trust in the aftermath of leader failure. Journal of Business and
Psychology, 31, 533–551.

Hall, J. H., & Fincham, F. D. (2006). Relationship dissolution following infidelity: The role
of attributions and forgiveness. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 25, 508–522.

Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal relations. New York: Wiley.
Hogg, M. A. (2001). A social identity theory of leadership. Personality and Social

Psychology Review, 5(3), 184–200.
Hollander, E. (1992). The essential interdependence of leadership and followership.

Current Directions in Psychological Science, 1, 71–75.
Hovland, C. I., Janis, I. L., & Kelley, H. H. (1953). Communication and persuasion;

Psychological studies of opinion change. New Haven, CT, US: Yale University Press.
Huang, X., Wright, R. P., Chiu, W. C. K., & Wang, C. (2008). Relational schemas as sources

of evaluation and misevaluation in leader-member exchanges: Some initial evidence.
The Leadership Quarterly, 19, 266–282.

Hughes, D. J., Lee, A., Tian, A. W., Newman, A., & Legood, A. (2018). Leadership,
creativity, and innovation: A critical review and practical recommendations. The
Leadership Quarterly, 29, 549–569.

Jones, E. E., & Davis, K. E. (1965). From acts to dispositions: The attribution process in
person perception. In L. Berkowitz (Vol. Ed.), Advances in experimental social psy-
chology. Vol. II. Advances in experimental social psychology (pp. 219–266). New York:
Academic Press.

Jones, W. H., Moore, D. S., Schratter, A., & Negel, L. A. (2001). Interpersonal trans-
gressions and betrayals. In R. M. Kowalski (Ed.). Behaving badly: Aversive behaviors in
interpersonal relationships (pp. 233–256). Washington, DC, US: American
Psychological Association.

Karelaia, N., & Keck, S. (2013). When deviant leaders are punished more than non-lea-
ders: The role of deviance severity. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 49,
783–796.

Kelley, D. (1998). The communication of forgiveness. Communication Studies, 49,
255–271.

Kelley, H. H. (1973). The process of causal attribution. American Psychologist, 28,
107–128.

Kim, P. H., Cooper, C. D., Dirks, K. T., & Ferrin, D. L. (2013). Repairing trust with in-
dividuals vs. groups. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 120, 1–14.

Kim, P. H., Dirks, K. T., Cooper, C. D., & Ferrin, D. L. (2006). When more blame is better
than less: The implications of internal vs. external attributions for the repair of trust
after a competence- vs. integrity-based trust violation. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 99, 49–65.

Kim, P. H., Ferrin, D. L., Cooper, C. D., & Dirks, K. T. (2004). Removing the shadow of
suspicion: The effects of apology versus denial for repairing competence-versus in-
tegrity-based trust violations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89, 104–118.

Kluemper, D. H., Taylor, S. G., Bowler, W. M., Bing, M. N., & Halbesleben, J. R. B. (2019).
How leaders perceive employee deviance: Blaming victims while excusing favorites.

Journal of Applied Psychology, 104, 946–964.
Kothari, S. P., & Warner, J. B. (2008). Econometrics of event studies. In B. E. Eckbo (Vol.

Ed.), Handbook of corporate finance: Empirical corporate finance. Vol. 1. Handbook of
corporate finance: Empirical corporate finance (pp. 3–36). Elsevier.

Kramer, R. M. (1999). Trust and distrust in organizations: Emerging perspectives, en-
during questions. Annual Review of Psychology, 50, 569–598.

Kramer, R. M., & Lewicki, R. J. (2010). Repairing and enhancing trust: Approaches to
reducing organizational trust deficits. Academy of Management Annals, 4, 245–277.

Krantz, J. (2006). Leadership, betrayal and adaptation. Human Relations, 59, 221–240.
Krasikova, D. V., & LeBreton, J. M. (2012). Just the two of us: Misalignment of theory and

methods in examining dyadic phenomena. Journal of Applied Psychology, 97,
739–757.

Krylova, K. O., Jolly, P. M., & Phillips, J. S. (2017). Followers’ moral judgments and
leaders’ integrity-based transgressions: A synthesis of literatures. The Leadership
Quarterly, 28, 195–209.

Langley, A., Smallman, C., Tsoukas, H., & Van de Ven, A. H. (2013). Process studies of
change in organization and management: Unveiling temporality, activity, and flow.
Academy of Management Journal, 56, 1–13.

Lavallee, L. F., & Campbell, J. D. (1995). Impact of personal goals on self-regulation
processes elicited by daily negative events. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 69, 341–352.

Leunissen, J. M., De Cremer, D., Reinders Folmer, C. P., & van Dijke, M. (2013). The
apology mismatch: Asymmetries between victim’s need for apologies and perpe-
trator’s willingness to apologize. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 49,
315–324.

Lewicki, R. J., & Brinsfield, C. (2017). Trust repair. Annual Review of Organizational
Psychology and Organizational Behavior, 4, 287–313.

Lewicki, R. J., & Bunker, B. B. (1996). Developing and maintaining trust in work re-
lationships. In R. M. Kramer, & T. R. Tyler (Eds.). Trust in organizations: Frontiers in
theory and research (pp. 114–139). Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.

Liang, L. H., Brown, D. J., Lian, H., Hanig, S., Ferris, D. L., & Keeping, L. M. (2018).
Righting a wrong: Retaliation on a voodoo doll symbolizing an abusive supervisor
restores justice. The Leadership Quarterly, 29, 443–456.

Liborius, P. (2014). Who is worthy of being followed? The impact of leaders’ character
and the moderating role of followers’ personality. The Journal of Psychology, 148,
347–385.

Liborius, P. (2017). What does leaders’ character add to transformational leadership? The
Journal of Psychology, 151, 299–320.

Liden, R. C., Anand, S., & Vidyarthi, P. (2016). Dyadic relationships. Annual Review of
Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior, 3, 139–166.

Loignon, A. C., Gooty, J., Rogelberg, S. G., & Lucianetti, L. (2019). Disagreement in
leader–follower dyadic exchanges: Shared relationship satisfaction and investment as
antecedents. Journal of Occupational & Organizational Psychology, 92, 618–644.

Lonati, S., Quiroga, B. F., Zehnder, C., & Antonakis, J. (2018). On doing relevant and
rigorous experiments: Review and recommendations. Journal of Operations
Management, 64, 19–40.

Lord, R. G., Epitropaki, O., Foti, R. J., & Hansbrough, T. K. (2019). Implicit leadership and
followership theories and dynamic processing of leader information. Annual Review of
Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior, 7.

Lount, R. B., Jr., Zhong, C. B., Sivanathan, N., & Murnighan, J. K. (2008). Getting off on
the wrong foot: The timing of a breach and the restoration of trust. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 34, 1601–1612.

Mackey, J. D., Frieder, R. E., Brees, J. R., & Martinko, M. J. (2017). Abusive supervision: A
meta-analysis and empirical review. Journal of Management, 43, 1940–1965.

Maio, G. M., & Thomas, G. (2007). The epistemic-teleologic model of deliberate self
persuasion. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 11, 1–22.

Maio, G. R., Thomas, G., Fincham, F. D., & Carnelley, K. B. (2008). Unraveling the role of
forgiveness in family relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94,
307–319.

Marquardt, D. J., Brown, L. W., & Casper, W. J. (2018). Ethical leadership perceptions:
Does it matter if you’re black or white? Journal of Business Ethics, 151, 599–612.

Martin, R., Epitropaki, O., Erdogan, B., & Thomas, G. (2019). Relationship-based lea-
dership: Current trends and future prospects. Journal of Occupational and
Organizational Psychology, 92, 465–474.

Martin, R., Epitropaki, O., Thomas, G., & Topakas, A. (2010). A review of leader-member
exchange (LMX) research: Future prospects and directions. International Review of
Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 25, 35–88.

Martin, A. A., Hill, P. L., & Allemand, M. (2019). Attachment predicts transgression fre-
quency and reactions in romantic couples’ daily life. Journal of Social and Personal
Relationships, 36(8), 2247–2267.

Martinko, M. J., Harvey, P., Brees, J. R., & Mackey, J. (2013). A review of abusive su-
pervision research. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 34, S120–S137.

Mawritz, M. B., Mayer, D. M., Hoobler, J. M., Wayne, S. J., & Marinova, S. V. (2012). A
trickle-down model of abusive supervision. Personnel Psychology, 65, 325–357.

Mayer, D. M., Kuenzi, M., Greenbaum, R., Bardes, M., & Salvador, R. (2009). How low
does ethical leadership flow? Test of a trickle-down model. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 108, 1–13.

Mayer, D. M., Thau, S., Workman, K. M., Van Dijke, M., & De Cremer, D. (2012). Leader
mistreatment, employee hostility, and deviant behaviors: Integrating self-uncertainty
and thwarted needs perspectives on deviance. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 117, 24–40.

Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, F. D. (1995). An integrative model of organi-
zational trust. Academy of Management Review, 20, 709–734.

Mayseless, O. (2010). Attachment and the leader-follower relationship. Journal of Social
and Personal Relationships, 27(2), 271–280.

McCullough, M. E., Fincham, F. D., & Tsang, J. (2003). Forgiveness, forbearance, and

O. Epitropaki, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101376

18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0545
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0545
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0565
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0565
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0565
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0570
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0570
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0575
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0575
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0580
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0580
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0580
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0595


time: The temporal unfolding of transgression-related interpersonal motivations.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 540–557.

McCullough, M. E., & Hoyt, W. T. (2002). Transgression-related motivational disposi-
tions: Personality substrates of forgiveness and their links to the Big Five. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 1556–1573.

McCullough, M. E., Rachal, K. C., Sandage, S. J., Worthington, E. L., Jr., Brown, S. W., &
Hight, T. L. (1998). Interpersonal forgiving in close relationships: II. Theoretical
elaboration and measurement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75,
1586–1603.

McKenny, A. F., Aguinis, H., Short, J. C., & Anglin, A. H. (2018). What doesn’t get
measured does exist: Improving the accuracy of computer-aided text analysis. Journal
of Management, 44, 2909–2933.

Meyer, A. D. (1982). Adapting to environmental jolts. Administrative Science Quarterly, 27,
515–537.

Mitchell, M. S., & Ambrose, M. L. (2007). Abusive supervision and workplace deviance
and the moderating effects of negative reciprocity beliefs. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 92, 1159–1168.

Mitchell, M. S., Baer, M. D., Ambrose, M. L., Folger, R., & Palmer, N. F. (2018). Cheating
under pressure: A self-protection model of workplace cheating behavior. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 103, 54–73.

Mok, A., & De Cremer, D. (2015). Overlooking interpersonal hurt: A global processing
style influences forgiveness in work relationships. European Journal of Work and
Organizational Psychology, 24, 267–278.

Morgeson, F. P., Mitchell, T. R., & Liu, D. (2015). Event system theory: An event-oriented
approach to the organizational sciences. Academy of Management Review, 40,
515–537.

Murray, S. L., & Holmes, J. G. (1993). Seeing virtues in faults: Negativity and the
transformation of interpersonal narratives in close relationships. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 65, 707–722.

Murray, S. L., & Holmes, J. G. (1999). The (mental) ties that bind: Cognitive structures
that predict relationship resilience. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77(6),
1228–1244.

Olekalns, M., Barker, C. B., & Vogus, T. (2019). Gradual drifts, abrupt shocks: From re-
lationship fractures to relational resilience. Academy of Management Annals. https://
doi.org/10.5465/annals.2017.0111.

Padilla, A., Hogan, R., & Kaiser, R. B. (2007). The toxic triangle: Destructive leaders,
susceptible followers, and conducive environments. The Leadership Quarterly, 18,
176–194.

Park, H., Hoobler, J. M., Wu, J., Liden, R. C., Hu, J., & Wilson, M. S. (2019). Abusive
supervision and employee deviance: A multifoci justice perspective. Journal of
Business Ethics, 158, 1113–1131.

Petriglieri, J. L. (2011). Under threat: Responses to and the consequences of threats to
individuals’ identities. Academy of Management Review, 36, 641–662.

Pierce, C. A., Aguinis, H., & Adams, S. K. R. (2000). Effects of a dissolved workplace
romance and rater characteristics on responses to a sexual harassment accusation.
Academy of Management Journal, 43, 869–880.

Pina e Cunha, M., Campos e Cunha, R., & Rego, A. (2009). Exploring the role of
leader—Subordinate interactions in the construction of organizational positivity.
Leadership, 5, 81–101.

Podsakoff, P. M., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2019). Experimental designs in management and
leadership research: Strengths, limitations, and recommendations for improving
publishability. The Leadership Quarterly, 30, 11–33.

Radulovic, A. B., Thomas, G., Epitropaki, O., & Legood, A. (2019). Forgiveness in lea-
der–member exchange relationships: Mediating and moderating mechanisms. Journal
of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 92, 498–534.

Randsley de Moura, G., & Abrams, D. (2013). Bribery, blackmail, and the double standard
for leader transgressions. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice, 17, 43–52.

Reina, D. S., & Reina, M. L. (2006). Trust and betrayal in the workplace: Building effective
relationships in your organization. San Francisco: Berrett Koehler.

Ren, H., & Gray, B. (2009). Repairing relationship conflict: How violation types and
culture influence the effectiveness of restoration rituals. Academy of Management
Review, 34, 105–126.

Robinson, S. L., & Bennett, R. J. (1995). A typology of deviant workplace behaviors: A
multidimensional scaling study. Academy of Management Journal, 38, 555–572.

Rusbult, C. E. (1980). Commitment and satisfaction in romantic associations: A test of the
investment model. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 16, 172–186.

Rusbult, C. E., & van Lange, P. A. M. (2003). Interdependence, interaction, and re-
lationships. Annual Review of Psychology, 54, 351–375.

Rusbult, C. E., Olsen, N., Davis, J., & Hannon, P. A. (2001). Commitment and relationship
maintenance mechanisms. In J. Harvey, & A. Wenzel (Eds.). Close romantic relation-
ships: Maintenance and enhancement (pp. 87–113). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.

Rusbult, C. E., Verette, J., Whitney, G. A., Slovik, L. F., & Lipkus, I. (1991).
Accommodation processes in close relationships: Theory and preliminary empirical
support. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60, 53–78.

Schweitzer, M. E., Hershey, J. C., & Bradlow, E. T. (2006). Promises and lies: Restoring
violated trust. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 101, 1–19.

Schyns, B., & Schilling, J. (2013). How bad are the effects of bad leaders? A meta-analysis
of destructive leadership and its outcomes. The Leadership Quarterly, 24, 138–158.

Scollon, C. N., Kim-Prieto, C., & Diener, E. (2003). Experience sampling: Promises and
pitfalls, strengths and weaknesses. Journal of Happiness Studies, 4, 5–34.

Serban, A., Yammarino, F. J., Dionne, S. D., Kahai, S. S., Hao, C., McHugh, K. A., ...
Peterson, T. R. (2015). Leadership emergence in face-to-face and virtual teams: A
multi-level model with agent-based simulations, quasi-experimental and experi-
mental tests. The Leadership Quarterly, 26, 402–418.

Shao, B. (2019). Moral anger as a dilemma? An investigation on how leader moral anger
influences follower trust. Leadership Quarterly, 30, 365–382.

Shapiro, D. L., Boss, A. D., Salas, S., Tangirala, S., & Von Glinow, M. A. (2011). When are
transgressing leaders punitively judged? An empirical test. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 96, 412–422.

Stouten, J., & Tripp, T. M. (2009). Claiming more than equality: Should leaders ask for
forgiveness? The Leadership Quarterly, 20, 287–298.

Strang, S., Utikal, V., Fischbacher, U., Weber, B., & Falk, A. (2014). Neural correlates of
receiving an apology and active forgiveness: An fMRI study. PLoS ONE, 9(2), e87654.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0087654.

Tepper, B. J. (2007). Abusive supervision in work organizations: Review, synthesis, and
research agenda. Journal of Management, 33(3), 261–289.

Thanem, T. (2013). More passion than the job requires? Monstrously transgressive lea-
dership in the promotion of health at work. Leadership, 9, 396–415.

Thomas, G., Martin, R., Epitropaki, O., Guillaume, Y. R. F., & Lee, A. (2013). Social
cognition in leader-follower relationships: Applying insights from relationship sci-
ence to understanding relationship-based approaches to leadership. Journal of
Organizational Behavior, 34, 63–81.

Thomas, G., Martin, R., & Riggio, R. E. (2013). Leading groups: Leadership as a group
process. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 16, 3–16.

Thompson, B., & Simkins, T. J. (2017). Self-oriented forgiveness and other-oriented for-
giveness: Shaping high-quality exchange relationships. Journal of Management &
Organization, 23, 741–765.

Tjosvold, D. (1989). Interdependence and power between managers and employees: A
study of the leader relationship. Journal of Management, 15, 49–62.

Tomlinson, E. C., Dineen, B. R., & Lewicki, R. J. (2004). The road to reconciliation:
Antecedents of victim willingness to reconcile following a broken promise. Journal of
Management, 30, 165–187.

Tumasjan, A., Strobel, M., & Welpe, I. (2011). Ethical leadership evaluations after moral
transgression: Social distance makes the difference. Journal of Business Ethics, 99,
609–622.

Van Eck, N. J., & Waltman, L. (2010). Software survey: VOSviewer, a computer program
for bibliometric mapping. Scientometrics, 84(2), 523–538.

Van Eck, N. J., & Waltman, L. (2019). VOSviewer Manual. Leiden University.
van Gils, S., Van Quaquebeke, N., van Knippenberg, D., van Dijke, M., & De Cremer, D.

(2015). Ethical leadership and follower organizational deviance: The moderating role
of follower moral attentiveness. The Leadership Quarterly, 26, 190–203.

van Houwelingen, G., van Dijke, M., & De Cremer, D. (2015). Getting it done and getting
it right: Leader disciplinary reactions to followers’ moral transgressions are de-
termined by construal level mindset. The Leadership Quarterly, 26, 878–891.

Waldron, V. R., & Kelley, D. L. (2008). Communicating forgiveness. Thousand Oaks, CA, US:
Sage Publications, Inc.

Wang, L., & Murnighan, J. K. (2017). The dynamics of punishment and trust. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 102, 1385–1402.

Wang, R., & Chan, K. S. D. (2019). Will you forgive your supervisor’s wrongdoings? The
moral licensing effect of ethical leader behaviors. Frontiers in Psychology, 10, 1–12.

Wilson, K., Sin, H., & Conlon, D. (2010). What about the leader in leader-member ex-
change? The impact of resource exchanges and substitutability on the leader.
Academy of Management Review, 35, 358–372.

Wirtz, N., Rigotti, T., Otto, K., & Loeb, C. (2017). What about the leader? Crossover of
emotional exhaustion and work engagement from followers to leaders. Journal of
Occupational Health Psychology, 22, 86–97.

Worthington, E. L., Jr. (2006). Forgiveness and reconciliation: Theory and application.
Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group.

Zaccaro, S. J., & Marks, M. A. (1999). The roles of leaders in high-performance teams. In
E. Sundstorm & Associates (Eds.), Supporting work team effectiveness: Best man-
agement practices for fostering high performance (pp. 95–125). San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.

Zdaniuk, A., & Bobocel, D. R. (2015). The role of idealized influence leadership in pro-
moting workplace forgiveness. The Leadership Quarterly, 26, 863–877.

Zheng, M. X., van Dijke, M., Narayanan, J., & De Cremer, D. (2018). When expressing
forgiveness backfires in the workplace: Victim power moderates the effect of ex-
pressing forgiveness on transgressor compliance. European Journal of Work and
Organizational Psychology, 27, 70–87.

O. Epitropaki, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101376

19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0595
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0595
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0600
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0600
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0600
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0605
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0605
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0605
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0605
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0610
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0610
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0610
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0615
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0615
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0620
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0620
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0620
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0625
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0625
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0625
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0635
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0635
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0635
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0640
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0640
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0640
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0645
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0645
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0645
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9085
https://doi.org/10.5465/annals.2017.0111
https://doi.org/10.5465/annals.2017.0111
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0655
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0655
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0655
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0660
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0660
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0660
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0665
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0665
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0670
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0670
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0670
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0675
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0675
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0675
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0680
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0680
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0680
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0685
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0685
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0685
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0690
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0690
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0695
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0695
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0700
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0700
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0705
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0705
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0710
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0710
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0710
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0710
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0715
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0715
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0715
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0720
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0720
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0725
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0725
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0730
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0730
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0735
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0735
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0735
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0735
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0740
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0740
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0745
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0745
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0745
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0750
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0750
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0087654
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0760
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0760
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0765
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0765
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0770
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0770
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0770
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0770
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0775
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0775
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0780
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0780
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0780
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0785
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0785
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0790
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0790
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0790
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0795
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0795
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0795
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0800
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0800
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0805
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0810
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0810
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0810
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0815
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0815
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0815
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0820
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0820
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0825
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0825
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0830
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0830
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0835
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0835
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0835
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0840
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0840
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0840
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf9100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0845
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0845
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0850
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0850
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0850
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30827-0/rf0850

