The Leadership Quarterly

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua

Review

Leadership of socio-political vanguards: A review and future directions

Richard T. Marcy
The University of Victoria, Canada

A B S T R A C T

With the influential rise of the Alt-Right throughout the West in recent years, there has been a renewed interest in the leadership of these forms of fringe political
groups. While some work on the leadership of these types of groups was done in the 1960s, 70s, and 80s, less work has been done since then. Given the important role
of these groups in today's political environment, a review and theoretical integration of this past leadership work, along with suggestions for future research
directions, is overdue.

This paper begins by reviewing what literature exists regarding the leadership of socio-political vanguards, as well as what additional literature exists that may
also be relevant to better understanding the phenomenon of vanguard leadership. Vanguard leadership is then placed within the historical context and goals of past
vanguard groups. This analysis then leads to further defining some of the components of vanguard leadership along with a review of typically associated leadership
traits, skills and behaviours.

While few theories directly address the way in which vanguard leadership operates, this paper reviews related leadership theories that might offer meaningful
contributions to our understanding of socio-political vanguard leadership. Some theories, such as those related to social movements (particularly burgeoning), minor
but influential mainstream political groups, and advocacy/activist collectives are particularly relevant here and are reviewed along with more general leadership
theories that might also hold applicability, such as those related to leader and follower (and public) information processing and sensemaking under crises. The paper
then concludes with some suggestions for future research directions.

Introduction

With the influential rise of the Alt-Right throughout the West, there
has been a renewed interest in the leadership of fringe political groups.
Although it is neither a political party nor a social movement as typi-
cally defined, the Alt-Right's influence on mainstream journalism, pol-
itics, and even governments has been indisputable. While the sensa-
tional political approaches of the Alt-Right have been garnering a large
amount of recent press, there has been less work investigating the
leadership processes within these forms of socio-political vanguards.
Although some references have been made to the leadership of and
within these groups in the social movement literature, very little has
been done in other literatures; and of the work that has been done,
much of it has often been peripheral to other investigations, with the
focus of these prior studies being primarily on issues apart from the
leadership of vanguards. Given the important role of leadership of
vanguard groups in today's political environment, a review and in-
tegration of this past work with more recent leadership research is
overdue.

This paper will begin by reviewing what literature exists regarding
the leadership of socio-political vanguards, as well as what additional
literature exists that may also be relevant to better understanding the
phenomenon of vanguard leadership. Vanguard leadership will then be
placed within the historical context and goals of past vanguard groups.

This analysis will then lead to further defining some of the components
of vanguard leadership along with a review of typically associated
leadership behaviours.

While few theories directly speak to the way in which vanguard
leadership operates, this paper will also review related leadership the-
ories that might offer meaningful contributions to our understanding of
socio-political vanguard leadership. Some theories, such as those re-
lated to social movements (particularly emerging), minor but influen-
tial political parties, and advocacy/activist collectives are particularly
relevant here and will be reviewed, along with more general leadership
theories that might also hold applicability, such as those related to
leader and follower (and public) information processing and sense-
making under crises. The paper will then conclude with an evaluation
of the extant literature and some prescription for future research di-
rections.

Some key questions that this paper will address include:

1. What are socio-political vanguards and what constitutes vanguard
leadership?

2. What are its goals?
3. What does vanguard leadership look like (i.e., what are behaviours

that might typically be associated with vanguard leadership)?
4. What existing theories might help explain and help us better un-

derstand vanguard leadership?

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101372
Received 16 November 2018; Received in revised form 29 October 2019; Accepted 1 December 2019

E-mail address: rtmarcy@uvic.ca.

The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101372

Available online 23 December 2019
1048-9843/ © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

T

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/10489843
https://www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101372
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101372
mailto:rtmarcy@uvic.ca
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101372
http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101372&domain=pdf


5. What further research and theoretical development could we be
doing?

Socio-political vanguards – definitions and historical background

The definition of a socio-political vanguard (in French, avant-garde)
is one that has evolved quite a bit since Lenin – one of the first to
popularize the term in its political sense – began to theorize and apply it
as a strategic approach back in the early 1900's. The term has roots in
military expeditions – it described the most forward unit that would
disrupt the enemy and secure ground in advance of the main army.
Lenin later developed the idea of a vanguard as a party (en avant)
comprised of dedicated members - often intellectuals and activists -
whose primary purpose was to spread Marxist concepts and educate the
proletariat in Marxism, while disrupting the status quo; in Lenin's case,
the status quo being the Imperial Russian government (Lenin, 1973).

Since then, the term vanguard has evolved to include groups of
intellectuals and activists that work towards spreading their own par-
ticular brand of political ideas (whether Right, Left, or other), often
through propaganda and other forms of agitation, in an attempt to
subvert and overthrow the prevailing mainstream culture and – ulti-
mately – the political establishment. Given the importance of the
communication function within the vanguard approach, it is little sur-
prise that a large number of contemporary socio-political vanguards
have either emerged from cultural vanguards or have had a strong
cultural component. Groups such as the Futurists1 and the Situationists2

were both initially aesthetic movements that eventually grew to in-
corporate and extend socio-political elements.

Drawing from its military pedigree, the term as presently used also
suggests a separate unit and one that is in advance – more forward –
than other groups engaged in a similar fight, albeit to a more moderate
degree and in quite different environments (i.e., the hostile front that a
vanguard typically contends with as contrasted with a more benign rear
area); in the socio-political sense, this implies that a vanguard is “ahead
of the characteristic beliefs and norms of the wider society” (Wood,
2002) and in direct contestation with those status quo beliefs and
norms, while the larger social movement is more moderate and in-line
with the public's belief, values, and worldview.

This in fact is a key differentiator between vanguards and their
counterparts, social movements; as has been noted by Bill Moyer,
McAllister, and Finley (2001), “Movement activists will be successful
only to the extent that they can convince the great majority of people
that the movement, not the elite power holders, truly represents soci-
ety's positive and widely held values and sensibilities.” He goes on to
note that “movements are self destructive to the extent that they are
defined as rebellious, on the fringes of society, and in opposition to the
society's cherished core social values, symbols, rituals, beliefs, and
principles.” This latter warning of course is an apt description of van-
guards. While behaving in such a way would be self-defeating for many
social movement leaders, these defining factors are often levers of
profound influence for vanguard leaders.

This division speaks to the evolving perspective on vanguards as
groups that are somewhat autonomous (in the modern use of the term –
not directly, or at least publicly, affiliated with an established political
party or mass social movement) and not inherently a direct part of the
political process. Rather, vanguards work to shift public consciousness
to set the stage for other individuals and social movements to effect
political change. Political parties are typically defined as organizations
that seek to influence public policy by getting its candidates elected to
public office. Party members share the same ideology and run electoral
campaigns based on political platforms linked to this ideology. In this
respect, political parties are entrenched in the structures of society and
serve to link governmental institutions to elements of civil society. By
contrast, vanguards also work to gain the attention of the mainstream
public, but not as an institutionalized group or political party – they
often diverge from party politics to concentrate their impact on shifting
cultural and political norms or ‘public mindshare’. Vanguards do not
see themselves as participating members of the status quo political
process and typically do not have as a goal becoming a part of it in the
immediate future.

While vanguards are sometimes similar to interest and activist
groups in some of their tactics, their missions generally account for
more than one issue – they often have an entire worldview they are
trying to bring to fruition, one that is typically utopian (Lindholm &
Zúquete, 2010). And while the propaganda and agitation that van-
guards put forward often lends support to some social movements and/
or their primary political goals, it is important to draw distinctions
between the actions of vanguards and those of mass social movements
as they often quite differ in how they work to achieve political objec-
tives, particularly in terms of mission, strategies, and tactics.

Historical reviews of past social change sometimes further muddy
the distinctions between different leaders involved in these periods.
While hagiographies of prominent social movements often describe
leaders as ‘vanguards’ at early stages in their movements (thereby
lending credibility to their reputations of integrity, courage, and tena-
city), many such leaders actually espoused positions that, while cer-
tainly challenging, were still more moderate and socially acceptable
forms of vanguard positions of the same period (for example,
Mussolini's more moderate form – fascism – of Marinetti's Futurism, or
Martin Luther King's civil rights movement as compared to Malcolm X's
black nationalism). This conflation of vanguards with the beginning
phases of social movements further overlooks a key strategic pillar of
vanguards that was developed as far back as Lenin: namely, that van-
guards are best employed as levers for change when juxtaposed with
mass social movements. In effect, as vanguards open up political space
in the consciousness of the public through direct contestation, mass
social movement agendas appear less challenging/extreme.

Similarly, while some mass social movement leaders have been er-
roneously labeled vanguard leaders due to loose criteria and histor-
icization of the beginnings of social movements, the proper definition
and delineation of vanguards has also suffered from later violence
committed by some vanguard groups. This has led to further confusion,
leaving the categorization of some vanguard leaders to either ‘social
movement leader’ or ‘terrorist leader’, instead of more tightly defining

1 Futurism promoted a “dynamic modernization” (Wood, 1999, p.196); its
advocation of violence contained both anarchist and Fascist elements. Filipo
Tommaso Marinetti (1876–1944) authored the 1909 Futurist Manifesto which
advocated for the violent rejection of traditional forms of art in favor of the
incorporation of modern technology and the use of violence as artistic methods.
Italian Futurism as an avant-garde soon became widespread across Europe
during the inter-war period. Marinetti wrote Fascist Manifesto in 1919 and later
became an active supporter of Mussolini. Marinetti himself actively supported
the Italian fascist regime and volunteered for military service during WWII. He
became a notable force in developing the party philosophy throughout the re-
gime's existence but did not insert himself directly into political life (Berghaus,
1996).

2 The Situationist International (SI) was an international social revolutionary
organization active from 1957 to 1972 made up of avant-garde artists, in-
tellectuals, and political theorists, founded by Guy Debord. While the in-
tellectual origins of the SI were rooted in Marxist critiques of capitalism the
underpinnings of this critique also absorbed into this a rejection of spirituality,
hedonism, and avant-garde art movements of the first half of the 20th century.
Debord (1931–1994) was a French writer, artist, and theorist who authored the
1967 book The Society of the Spectacle; both this book and Debord himself are
frequently cited as having been highly influential towards instigating the May
1968 student uprisings in France, where both students and SI members occu-
pied universities as a revolt against modern-day capitalist exploitation. The
central activities of the SI targeted the spread of commodity fetishism, or the
‘spectacle’ – meaning the reliance on objects rather than expression to mediate
social relations – into every aspect of life and culture (Home, 1991). Although
Debord's name is often associated with the 1968 uprisings, he himself did not
participate directly in partisan electoral politics.

R.T. Marcy The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101372

2



the boundaries between these groups (i.e., a group definitively moving
into a distinctly different phase and thus category).

In the strictest sense, the primary goal of a vanguard is not to lead
social movements, nor to commit violence, but to help shift the public's
consciousness to such a degree as to make it more amenable to future
political propositions that would lead to the vision that the vanguard
espouses. Those realized political propositions, however, and the social
movement and/or political party that might share or adopt them, are
not the goal of a vanguard to propose or to become (and nor should it
be – as the tactics typically employed by effective vanguards are ex-
tremely contentious, there is often little political capital remaining to
build a subsequent mainstream movement and/or campaign).

Further, being the leader of a vanguard requires a particular set of
complex skills that do not always translate to the equally complex
leading of mass movements and/or political parties – there are few
people that have the cognitive complexity as well as the wide-ranging
behavioral repertoire to be effective as leaders in all of these environ-
ments (Aminzade, Goldstone, & Perry, 2001; Suedfeld & Rank, 1976).
As a result, the general fate of most vanguard groups is not to transition
to more mainstream political or even cultural success, but to either fade
into obscurity if they fail to shift the public's consciousness, or to have
their agenda co-opted by more mainstream movements (such as the
case with Futurism and fascism) if they are more successful.

Some recent examples of such vanguards include (but are not lim-
ited to) the Situationists and the Alt-Right. Both of these groups have
proven to be very influential with inserting ideas into mainstream social
and political debates, and have at times even created physical activity
(such as demonstrations or protests) that have disrupted mainstream
societal expectations.

Attending to vanguards as a unit of study for the purpose of ex-
amining leadership roles and strategies within these groups is important
for a number of reasons. First, while infrequently attended to in the
literature, the leadership of vanguards remains a very visible and no-
teworthy subject of study that numerous disciplinary areas could shed
important light on; and yet, it has rarely been the primary focus of
investigations and has often been subsumed within other studies (social
movements, history of political groups, the psychology of ideology and
social change). Second, the influence of counter-cultural socio-political
groups appears to be a growing and significant force in shaping con-
temporary political debates and expectations. This is evident in the way
in which the Alt-Right, to name just one recent vanguard, has made
such a strong impact on North American political discourse in the past
couple of years; its use of the Internet in spreading information and
platforms for sharing ideas has been extremely influential. In contrast to
political parties which have typically wielded influence through cam-
paign donations, promotion by public news, and electoral success,
many of the present-day social issues that have been taken up and
worked through by the public began with vanguard members using
anonymous forum boards, Twitter hashtags, and social networking.

Third, the number of these groups also appears to be growing, with
multiple groups vying for public attention and warring both with
themselves and the public. And finally, while the long-term effect of
some of these present-day groups such as the Alt Right has yet to be
determined, there is plenty of evidence that past vanguards, such as the
Situationist International, have played an important role in helping to
shape and inform the political landscape that we live in today.

Given these factors, a review which would primarily concentrate on
these forms of vanguards and, in particular, the way in which leader-
ship operates within these groups would appear to be of some present
value. Although not all leaders of vanguards go on to command political
power (given the confrontational approach of vanguards, this is often
not an option), these forms of leadership have certainly been very in-
fluential and thus warrant further investigation.

Vanguard leadership – context, goals, and levels of analysis

While the Alt Right has created a unique stir in the past couple of
years (and continues to have a presence), the Alt Right as a political
vanguard is not as novel an entity as some journalists today might
suggest. Vanguards on the political right (meaning, right-wing) have not
held as prominent a place in the public eye since the 1930's, but the
history of socio-political vanguards in general is quite lengthy.
Although a somewhat ‘modern’ phenomena (meaning, since the onset
of modernism), there have been a series of vanguards that have been
very influential culturally and politically since at least the early 1900's.

Arguably one of the most influential socio-political vanguards
within the past fifty years was the Situationist International (SI). Led by
Guy Debord, the SI is often credited with being one of the primary
instigators of the civil unrest of May 1968 in Paris, France. The SI began
as an artistic avant-garde, creating works of art that were in contesta-
tion with the forms and meaning of the prevailing aesthetic and cultural
styles of the day (Hussey, 2001; Kaufmann, 2006; Marcy 2015;
Merrifield, 2005). They then moved into a political phase in which they
adopted a central mission of combatting the “commodification and
domination of social relationships in Western society by the media and
other cultural productions of the status quo, leading average people to
live disconnected and increasingly meaningless lives that are in essence
‘scripted’ by elites and intended to serve them” (Marcy, 2015, p.
373–374).

After moving into this political phase, Guy Debord and the SI shifted
their artistic efforts towards creating unique socio-political strategies
and tactics, which they then used to attack the hegemony of status quo
power. Some of these tactics included détournement (the art of re-
moving text and other elements of graphic design within mainstream
publications and replacing them with text informed by their own po-
litical viewpoints), extreme public displays (in which they would cap-
ture the public's attention through outright provocation), and the
‘construction of situations,’ which involved the creation of social ex-
periences that would be free of or subvert the contaminating influence
of status-quo notions related to everyday ways of living (such as those
primarily based on status-laden, market-driven desires).

The Alt-Right has clearly drawn from this legacy and has in-
corporated a number of these same tactics (albeit with a different po-
litical foundation), such as:

• the execution of subversive cultural approaches, such as
détournement - some Alt Right members, such as Walt Bizmarck,
have ‘detourned’ Walt Disney films and replaced their dialogue with
Alt-Right memes associated with immigration and IQ;

• the development and dissemination of coherent social theory (as in
the works of Richard Spencer and Jared Taylor);

• extreme public displays - as evidenced by the provocative public
appearances of Alt Right leaders like Richard Spencer);

• and the construction of situations which undermine and subvert
status quo social assumptions – as developed through various real-
world trolling initiatives such as the “It's ok to be white” poster
campaign.

All of these tactics serve an important function in breaking the
public's “false consciousness” (i.e. “a way of thinking that prevents a
person from perceiving the true nature of their social or economic si-
tuation”; Gramsci, 1971; Stevenson, 2010). This is an important first
step in achieving the primary goal of a vanguard: to shift the public's
consciousness to a state that is more amenable to the political vision
that the vanguard supports. Explained more in cognitive terms, these
tactics serve an important sensebreaking, sensegiving, and sensemaking
function. These processes are no small matter as the outcomes of these
tactics by the SI were profound: the student occupation of the Sorbonne
in May 68′ was greatly influenced by evolving Situationist theory and
practice (Hussey, 2001; Kaufmann, 2006; Merrifield, 2005), and the

R.T. Marcy The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101372

3



actions of these students in turn led to the civil revolts of May 1968 in
Paris, France. Similarly, the ‘Alt-Lite’ – the more moderate and much
larger faction of a growing, US populist movement leading up to the
2016 presidential election – was greatly influenced by the Alt Right,
having a high degree of overlap with their various tactics, strategies,
and political positions. The Alt Lite in turn was highly influential in
galvanizing support for Donald Trump in the presidential race of 2016,
helping in his election.

Given the great influence that these vanguards have wielded, it
bears delineating further what leadership of such a group might entail.
Unfortunately, research on the leadership of vanguards has been quite
limited and often embedded in larger studies of other phenomena, as
well as spread across a number of literatures over time, and often
conflated with other forms of leadership, to include leadership of social
movements (especially ‘revolutionary’ social movements), activist lea-
dership, cultural leadership (and the leadership of subcultures), com-
munity leadership (Nelson & Prilleltensky, 2005), and the leadership of
marginal political groups. While all of these forms of leadership hold
some relevance and overlap with vanguard leadership - along with
more general research on charismatic and ideological forms of leader-
ship, leading for creativity and innovation, and leader cognition (such
as sensemaking) – none of these should stand alone as a proxy for
vanguard leadership.

In moving more closely to a better understanding of vanguard lea-
dership, as differentiated from other forms of leadership, it might be
helpful to first define some goals that might be particularly unique to
the leadership of socio-political vanguards at different levels of ana-
lysis.

Inter-organizational and societal level goals

The primary goal of a vanguard leader is to gain and then shift the
public's consciousness to the socio-political worldview of the vanguard,
thus allowing the space for later groups and movements to further
particular political agendas. Doing so often means combatting the
status and power of elites in well-established social relationships
through the transformation of these social relationships. Given this
hostile relationship towards elites, collaborations between leaders of
vanguards and societal elites is often unlikely, necessitating tactical
approaches such as propaganda and agitation. Specht's (1975) tax-
onomy of social change (see Table 1) provides some nuance as to what
vanguard leaders can expect from elites when working to change the
status and power of relationships within a social system. Specht sug-
gests that there will likely be dissensus between vanguard leaders and
societal elites, which in turn suggests that collaboration between the
two will not likely be an option. Given the imbalance in power between
the two, there is also a threat that elites may try to co-opt vanguard
leaders and their ideas (a common hazard for vanguards), leaving
vanguard leaders with little choice but to avoid collaborating with the
‘enemy’.

Given that collaboration with elites is typically not a viable goal for
vanguard leaders, as it results in a less-than-optimal outcomes, other

strategic approaches for social change need to be devised and im-
plemented. One approach relies on influence attempts aimed directly at
the public. As vanguard leaders and their immediate followers often do
not have any form of institutionalized political power, they need to
commit to other ways to directly influence the public, such as engaging
in protest and otherwise leveraging institutionalized forms of commu-
nication, such as mainstream media channels (and now, with the Alt
Right, the internet). The desired outcome is to gain the public's atten-
tion and, once this has been achieved, to then subvert their common
understanding of politically informed relationships (i.e., senseb-
reaking), while at the same time providing viable alternatives (i.e.,
sensegiving) (Marcy 2015).

Gaining the attention of the public, however, is not an easy task,
particularly today. There are now multiple channels of information and
entertainment all vying for this very limited resource of public atten-
tion. To be able to compete with all of these other channels, a vanguard
leader needs to be creative and have a firm understanding of not only
public interest, but also of what tools might best be used to create novel
and sensational displays that will leverage this understanding. In the
case of the Situationists, Guy Debord once walked off a television set in
the middle of an interview while commenting, “We're not here to an-
swer cuntish questions” (this was in response to the question, “What is
Situationism?”) (Merrifield, 2005). Similarly, Richard Spencer – a
leader in the Alt Right – has given a number of provocative, televised
speeches, one of which he infamously concluded with what appeared to
be a ‘Roman salute’.

This understanding and subversion of a public “mental model” has
parallels to research on leader vision and the development of both a
general and prescriptive mental model. In the case of vanguard leaders,
it is vitally important that they not only have a strong understanding of
their own mental model for prescriptive social change, but they also
have a firm grounding in a more general model of public beliefs, values,
and political assumptions (Caughron, Shipman, Beeler, & Mumford,
2009). Situationist critiques of mass political understanding, most no-
tably in the development of notions such as the ‘false consciousness’ of
the working class, reflect some of this distinction between prescriptive
and general public mental models; as do some of the critiques made by
Richard Spencer on the difference between adopting an avant-garde
position in political struggles and one that is more mainstream, as in his
commentaries on the political trajectory of Paul Nehlen.

In developing an understanding of both of these models, a vanguard
leader is then better able to create and implement strategic approaches
that can effectively subvert elements of the public's general mental
model, which in turn will then provide the space to offer viable political
alternatives. In effect, a vanguard leader's task at the societal level is to
first ‘sensebreak’ a general public mental model of how social and po-
litical relationships work, and then help move the public towards a
prescriptive mental model through sensegiving (e.g. vision creation and
implementation) (Foldy, Goldman, & Ospina, 2008; Gioia &
Chittipeddi, 1991; Maitlis, 2005; Maitlis & Lawrence, 2007; Pratt,
2000). In doing so, they are not only calling attention to and making
salient particular social and political problems, but they are further
providing solutions to those problems.

Group level goals

Given the size of the primary goal at hand – the shifting of the
public's consciousness towards the worldview of the vanguard – a
vanguard leader will need a group of dedicated followers to help in
accomplishing this goal. As this goal requires a high level of intelligence
to understand, as well as creativity to generate and implement effective
strategies and tactics for dealing with it, it's little surprise that van-
guards are often comprised of innovative intellectuals, activists, and
artists. With these types of group members, a vanguard leader will need
to know how to be effective in leading other creative people in teams
(Basadur, 2004; Byrne, Mumford, Barrett, & Vessey, 2009; Mumford,

Table 1
Perceptions of social change, elite/challenger response, and mode of inter-
vention.

When change is perceived
as:

The response is
often:

The mode of
intervention is:

1 Rearrangement of resources Consensus Collaborative
2 Redistribution of resources Difference Campaign
3 Change in status

relationships
Dissensus Contest or disruption

4 Reconstruction of the entire
system

Insurrection Violence

Adapted from Specht (1975).

R.T. Marcy The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101372

4



Scott, Gaddis, & Strange, 2002), as well as providing the requisite au-
tonomy for others to exert leadership, both within the team as well as
with external constituencies. As these members are often highly capable
and do not typically suffer from a lack of options, vanguard leaders
must be up to the challenge of dealing with the some of the usual in-
ternal threats that can occur in creative groups (such as petty bickering)
as well as external threats (such as members being attacked and/or
swayed by elites to abandon their vanguard positions). Vanguard lea-
ders must help provide resources that enable the team to do its work, to
include the provision of emotional resources (such as emotional support
during times of acute stress) as well as financial resources, when pos-
sible. They must also help establish networks that link to other groups
of like-minded others and create useful alliances.

An additional related leadership task is for vanguard leaders to
provide exemplary role modeling to their immediate followers along
with the general public, and to act as a living embodiment of the al-
ternative political views that they are espousing. This example, espe-
cially if picked up by vanguard group followers, can also further serve
as a “demonstration project” to the public (Mumford, 2002), effectively
providing an enticing subculture for other potential members to con-
sider adopting and enacting. These new ways of working and living
help validate the superiority of the socio-political approaches and
identity that the vanguard group is proposing. Likewise, the vanguard
group can also be a way for a leader to further test and refine hy-
potheses related to these approaches.

Individual level goals

At the individual level, vanguard leaders need to be able to create
and implement novel strategies and tactics that will help gain and then
shift the public's consciousness in the direction of the social and poli-
tical worldview that they are trying to bring into being. This will re-
quire the employment of a set of cognitive skills that will help with
creativity and social innovation, such as effective forecasting and pro-
blem identification, as well as having a foundation of expertise on
which to build new mental models of, as well as new approaches to,
their community's problems.

Additionally, vanguard leaders need to provide through their own
analysis and behaviour a clear example of why their approach to social
and political life is superior to the existing paradigm. They need to
convince followers and potential followers that they are someone worth
following. As suggested by Shanteau (Shanteau, 1992; Shanteau, Weiss,
Thomas, & Pounds, 2000), it is not enough that someone has the
knowledge of an expert – they must also look like and behave like an
expert, which is to say that they have the expected cognitive and be-
havioral repertoire of a leader worth listening to.

Finally, as they are social and political outsiders, vanguard leaders
need to maintain and defend the integrity of their individual and group
identity, vision and platform in the face of sometimes-great opposition
by status quo institutions, such as the media, mainstream political
parties, and governments. This means that they need to have and
maintain a certain resilience when meeting mass condemnation.

Towards a model of vanguard leadership

A diagram of a model of vanguard leadership is shown in Fig. 1,
which illustrates two primary routes of influence that vanguard leader
attributes can have on effecting change: the route of leader influence on
groups and group membership, which in turn affect mass society norms
and values; and the route of leader influence directly affecting mass
society without the intervening group variables. Change in this context
refers to ‘sensebreaking’, ‘sensegiving’, and ‘sensemaking’, which to-
gether comprise a process of the public adopting new ideas and beliefs
about the larger socio-political setting, some of which may contradict
earlier status quo norms and values. The figure provides a representa-
tion of the effects of vanguard leader attributes into three basic

components: the level of individual leader behavior, the level of group
behaviours, and the level of mass society behavior/outcomes. Before
going into the model in detail, we first introduce its components below.

The first route identifies vanguard leader attributes within a group
setting as being relevant for strategic planning and culture-setting, both
in terms of the social/political/ideological parameters of the group as
well as the group's organizational culture within and amongst the group
members. The antecedent implications of the group members (person-
ality variables, cognitive skills, identity, and worldview) interact with
leadership attributes to shape the outcome behaviours of the group.
These group behaviours include the creation of authoritative texts, the
re-purposing of existing cultural symbols into new representations of
the vanguard (detournement), and worldview and lifestyle shifts. These
in turn influence outcomes on mass society beyond the groups, in the
form of large-scale public sensebreaking, sensemaking, and sensegiving.

The second route identifies the interaction of vanguard leader at-
tributes with a leader's behavior within the public space and not within
an internal group setting. Such behaviours include public speeches and
other displays of expertise, the publishing of authoritative texts, a
publicly unyielding and uncompromising position on socio-political
issues and official displays of commitment, and other potentially sen-
sational public displays which challenge acceptable status quo public
behaviours. The outcomes on mass society – change in norms – are the
same as those via the first route but bypass the element of a group
setting, going directly from the leader to the public.

The background setting of the general socio-political context pro-
vides an important contextual factor in this model of vanguard lea-
dership, by way of providing the climate for which certain issues are
more or less relevant. This background can include economics (public
financial austerity or economic growth), the presence and severity of
‘crises’ (natural or man-made disasters), the general ideological
worldview (for example, the importance of democracy), the political
landscape (the number of political parties, the presence of fringe par-
ties, the level of divisiveness between parties, general political or-
ientation), and the presence and substance of other vanguards and so-
cial movements within mass society.

Vanguard leadership traits, skills, and behaviours

Due to issues such as the muddiness of definitions of vanguards,
along with vanguard leadership being conflated with other forms of
leadership such as ‘social movement leadership’, there are few studies
that can be said to have definitively focused on the different traits,
skills, and behaviours of vanguard leaders. This is not to say that some
studies have not come close though, particularly those that have fo-
cused on ‘revolutionary’ or ‘rebel’ leadership.

Two excellent research studies on the theme of revolutionary lea-
dership – Rebel Leadership: Commitment and Charisma in the
Revolutionary Process (1973) by James Downton, and Leaders of
Revolution (1979) by Mostafa Rejai and Kay Phillips – highlight some of
the strengths and weaknesses that can more generally be found in the
literature when trying to define and better understand vanguard lea-
dership. Both of these studies provide individual, group, and societal
level criteria that are important to consider when attempting to define
vanguard leadership, such as the important roles that personality,
motivation, and context respectively play in these forms of leadership.
Downton's Rebel Leadership attends more to vanguard leadership as the
role is more tightly defined within this study, while the other – Rejai
and Phillips' Leaders of Revolution – does in fact speak more to revolu-
tionary leaders of mass movements. Although both cover Lenin, who
was one of very few leaders who was both a mass movement leader and
a vanguard leader, both researchers spend the rest of their studies
covering quite different leaders.

In their study, Rejai and Phillips note that defining and identifying
principal revolutionary leaders was more difficult than they expected,
and they go on to note that they ended up needing to distinguish “the

R.T. Marcy The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101372

5



‘real’ revolutionary [leader] from the dilettante, the propagandist, the
pamphleteer” (p. 13). These comments speak to some of the issues
raised earlier with the conflation of vanguard leaders with mass social
movement leaders: while few people would heartily accept being called
a dilettante, both propagandist and pamphleteer are roles that van-
guard leaders would immediately recognize and acknowledge that they
need to regularly fill. Interestingly, in a review of the revolutionary
leaders that Rejai and Phillips covered, they have done well in not in-
cluding/conflating vanguard leaders with ‘revolutionary’ leaders of
mass social movements. For example, in their review of leaders that
were involved with the events in France, May 68′, they note Daniel
Cohn-Bendit and Alain Geismar (two social movement leaders of the
period) but fail to note Guy Debord or Raoul Vaneigem (two vanguard
leaders in the same period). This can be contrasted with Downton's
“Rebel Leadership” qualitative study wherein he also was investigating
‘revolutionaries' (and also covered Lenin), but gave more prominent
coverage to leader such as Malcolm X of the Black Muslim movement (a
leader of a vanguard) and Marian Keech of the “End of the World”
movement (another leader of a vanguard).

Although there have been few studies that have had vanguard lea-
dership traits, skills, and/or behaviours as a primary focus (the above
being notable exceptions), there have been a number of historical re-
views conducted on many of these vanguard leaders, sometimes re-
sulting in rich case studies that can be mined for clues as to what traits,
skills, and/or behaviours these leaders might have had. Through ana-
lysing these historical reviews, we can begin to determine the different
components of vanguard leadership at the individual, group, and so-
cietal levels.

Individual level traits, skills, and behaviours

Early life experiences
In reviewing the histories of past vanguard leaders, it becomes clear

that many of them were forced to work through what Rejai and Phillips
(1979) refer to as ‘relative deprivation and status inconsistency’. Guy
Debord, leader of the vanguard Situationist International, suffered a

number of hardships as a young child. Debord's father died when De-
bord was only four years old; this then led to his family losing their
fortune and descending into poverty (Merrifield, 2005). His father's
death, the loss of his family's fortune and status in society, coupled with
the turbulence from World War II, very likely contributed to Debord's
character. Debord made numerous mentions of his childhood in his
work, often noting that he had seen “nothing but troubled times and
immense destruction” (Debord, 2004) (Kaufmann, 2006).

This same level of relative deprivation and status inconsistency is
noted amongst other vanguard leaders as well. While maintaining ex-
cellent grades in school, Malcolm X often spoke of the crime and drugs
that were also a part of his daily life in the neighborhood he grew up in
as a child; similarly, many leaders of the Alt Right have spoken of the
drug crisis and general decline of status of whites they feel has taken
place within their own neighborhoods over the past couple of decades.

These types of catalyst events have been shown to have large re-
percussions for future leadership in the leadership developmental lit-
erature (Ligon, Hunter, & Mumford, 2008; Moxley & Pulley, 2004),
impacting attitudes, cognitive development, and behavioral skill de-
velopment.

Traits and attitudes
While it can be difficult to disentangle the development of particular

attitudes and traits from some of these formative experiences, and
whether they would have been inherent and/or further developed
without these experiences, it is clear that many vanguard leaders share
some of the same attributes. For example, it is clear that vanguard
leaders would not rate very highly in Agreeableness on the Big Factor
Five personality assessment; given the contentious nature of the mission
of a vanguard, it would seem that this would come with the territory.
Similarly, it would seem that vanguard leaders often contrast with so-
cial movement leaders in their degree of extroversion, with vanguard
leaders, such as Guy Debord and Malcolm X, being somewhat more
critical of everyday social life, or in the least, more socially-removed
(i.e., introverted) than social movement leaders, who seem to be more
positively energized by engagement with the public. It is also likely that

Fig. 1. Model of vanguard leadership.

R.T. Marcy The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101372

6



most vanguard leaders would not be very high in need for social ac-
ceptance, as well as in conflict avoidance.

Given that many historical reviews of vanguards and vanguard
leaders are either thinly veiled hagiographies or denunciations, it is
difficult to determine how highly these leaders might rate on different
personality factors, such as the Light (Kantianism, Humanism and Faith
in Humanity) and Dark Triads (narcissism, Machiavellianism, and
psychopathy). Vanguards do not typically suffer from a lack of very
passionate supporters or detractors either, making it sometimes difficult
to more objectively determine how these types of leaders might rate on
these factors. Drawing from the extremist literature (a literature that
also somewhat suffers at times from conflating violent radicals with
vanguard leaders), it's been suggested that serious psychopathology is
rare amongst these types of radicals (at least on the Right where these
investigations have taken place) (Caiani & Borri, 2016), and it is further
unlikely that an “extremist personality profile” will ever be found
(Hafez & Mullins, 2015).

As might be expected, given the history of a number of socio-poli-
tical vanguards emerging from artistic vanguards (such as Dada and
Futurism), many vanguard leaders seem to have an “aesthetic and/or
romantic streak” (Rejai & Phillips, 1979). For example, Guy Debord was
an artist before, during, and after his leadership of the S.I. (Hussey,
2001; Kaufmann, 2006; Merrifield, 2005). More surprising, however,
might be the artistic leanings of leaders of the Alt Right, a connection
that has been far less publicized. For example, Richard Spencer has
repeatedly referred to past vanguards throughout his career, whether
through the naming of his internet podcasts (i.e., “Vanguard”), his
suggestions that he always wanted to become an “avant-garde theatre
director,” or in his discussions with other members of the Alt Right of
past artistic and socio-political avant-gardes (Marcy, 2019, in press).
Others, like Ramzpaul (a popular Alt Right vlogger), have directly made
references and comparisons to ‘samizdat’ (a Soviet-era political dis-
sident publishing practice) in relation to Alt Right information dis-
semination; another Alt Right leaders, Greg Johnson (head of Counter
Currents, a key Alt Right website), has just finished writing a ‘mani-
festo’ for the movement (a manifesto being another strategic tool that
has its roots in earlier artistic vanguard approaches). Millennial Woes,
in a recent podcast, even went so far as to suggest that the Alt Right is
an art movement.

These artistic leanings suggest that vanguard leaders may be taking
in different types of information than the norm (Ansburg & Hill, 2003;
Smith, Ward, & Finke, 1995), such as information related to aesthetics
and power, which often inform the ways in which people build their
worldviews. An awareness and facility with these forms of information
may be another fundamental difference between typical political lea-
ders and vanguard leaders. As outsiders, vanguards may have a per-
spective on status and social aesthetics that is arguably deeper than
many status quo political leaders.

Cognitive skills
Drawing together these attributes with the previously discussed life

experiences, it is easier to see how past vanguard leaders might have
been motivated to develop particular cognitive skills that would then
later help them to be more effective in their roles. For example, given
their background and traits, it is likely that they might develop multiple
mental models of how society might effectively ‘work’. This may be yet
another differentiator between vanguard leaders and some other types
of leaders: the depth and breadth of alternative mental models available
to draw from and combine (Scott, Lonergan, & Mumford, 2005). Mal-
colm X spoke frequently of the different worlds that whites and blacks
live in, despite living in the same community, while Guy Debord often
detailed the struggles between social and economic classes, high-
lighting their great differences. As a parallel, Alt Right intellectuals
have frequently made mention of a large divide between social elites
and the white working class.

As elites have little incentive to venture out of the status quo, their

understanding of the issues of those from less privileged backgrounds
becomes more limited. Many vanguard leaders, who have had wider-
ranging experiences due to the status inconsistency discussed earlier,
could arguably have richer informed models, as well as unique heur-
istics for problem identification. Some empirical support for this comes
from a recent study of sensemaking which found that the “more an
actor's cultural capital is privileged by existing organizational sche-
mata, the more likely it is that his or her disposition toward profession-
centrism will promote sensemaking about organizational change that
will not disrupt existing organizational schemata.” (Lockett, Currie,
Finn, Martin, & Waring, 2014). Research on marginalization and status
quo deviance further supports that ‘outsider’ experiences can lead to the
richer development of alternative mental models and heuristics
(Förster, Friedman, Butterbach, & Sassenberg, 2005; Kim, Vincent, &
Goncalo, 2013; Runco, 1999; Simonton, 1994; Simonton, 1999).

One often overlooked advantage to having personally experienced
deprivation and status inconsistency is not only in having a fuller un-
derstanding of the experience so as to more effectively solve similar
problems, but also in the building of coping skills to surmount future
challenges. These enhanced coping skills then in turn build a resiliency
that can be very helpful in facing future status quo rejection. Facing
rejection head-on is no small task, as it is a considerable challenge to
adaptively work through it (Leary & Terdal, 1995). Given that con-
testation and social rejection is a fundamental part of being a vanguard
leader, it's important that leaders of such groups have considerable
resilience. Having had past life experience with social rejection, and
having overcome it, especially when it is considered to be unjust, may
very well be the experiences that vanguard leaders need to face future
challenges to the status quo.

Group level traits, skills, and behaviours

Team leadership
Most past vanguards have been comprised of a small set of very

committed members (typically no more than twenty), with other as-
sociates filling roles of ‘allies’, meaning that they generally serve as
more of a support function. As originally conceptualized and im-
plemented by Lenin, subsequent vanguards have typically been com-
prised of intellectuals, artists, and activists. The Situationist
International, as led by Guy Debord, was no exception to this and was
primarily made up of painters, filmmakers, and architects, with some
playing a primary role as political theorists. They hailed from a number
of different countries, as well as class backgrounds. Being able to draw
from these varied skill sets and knowledge structures likely contributed
to their creative output (Kabanoff & Rossiter, 1994; Mumford et al.,
2002). As an artist himself, Debord was able to draw from his own
experience when executing particular leadership tasks at hand, such as
distributing resources effectively to followers (Byrne et al., 2009;
Marcy, 2015; Mumford et al., 2007). This is no small point as resources
are typically limited in vanguard operations and vanguard leaders need
to well understand the roles that they are asking others to fill. Leaders
of other vanguards such as Richard Huelsenbeck (Dada) and Filippo
Tommaso Marinetti (Futurists) were all artists as well.

Important resources that vanguard leaders must weigh and consider
include not only financial support but emotional and intellectual mat-
ters. Creative and intelligent people, as those often found in vanguards,
need a high degree of autonomy to fulfill their tasks. Vanguard leaders,
similar to scientists and artists, must cultivate a careful balance be-
tween allowing creativity to manifest itself in tasks and ensuring that
standards are met. Some vanguard leaders, such as Guy Debord, have
maintained this balance by allowing great latitude on the development
of a task on one hand, but expelling those from the group that did not
meet particular standards or did not deliver on a particular project
(Kaufmann, 2006); while vanguard groups, like the Alt Right, have
maintained commitment and exclusivity through the sheer offense of
their platform (i.e., people need to be committed just to be a member of

R.T. Marcy The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101372

7



the group). This management of deviance to internal group norms ex-
tends to the effective management of deviance in the wider society.
Group members of vanguards are typically under a great amount of
social pressure to conform and this is something that needs to be further
managed by vanguard leaders.

This exclusivity of vanguards contrasts sharply with social move-
ment and political party approaches, which tend to work towards ac-
cepting as many people as possible into their ranks and making as many
concessions as is possible to accommodate them, sometimes even going
so far as to render their agenda unrecognizable from its beginnings. In
contrast, Guy Debord turned more people away from the S.I. than he
welcomed (Kaufmann, 2006). There was a regular purging of the ranks
of the S.I., and once someone was expelled, Debord never admitted
them back. He notes in his autobiography that he “never sought out
anyone, anywhere” and that his “entourage [was] composed only of
those who came of their own accord and were capable of getting
themselves accepted” (Debord, 2004). Similarly, groups such as the Alt
Right have even fashioned jargon around the purging of members,
creating the terms “cuckservative” and “Alt Lite” to define those that
don't meet the ideological standards of the Alt Right.

Unlike social movement or political party leaders, vanguard leaders
tend not to make concessions to deviations. This style of team leader-
ship is particularly harsh, but there are elements to this approach that
are arguably adaptive. Vanguard groups are often under constant threat
by elites within social and political systems, whether it be co-optation
of their agenda or, even more extreme, attempts at violence. There is
literature, however, that suggests that there are ways in which a min-
ority group can counter these threats by maintaining a close-knit group
of loyal members (Nelson & Prilleltensky, 2005).

One is by sending clear signals to potential members of their com-
patibility with the group by purging incompatible others (Graen & Uhl-
Bien, 1995). Another is by presenting a strong and unified front to the
status quo. While some research suggests that there will likely be short
term losses in these approaches, it also suggests that there will also be
larger gains in influencing the majority over the long-term (such as the
conversion of majority beliefs to minority logics) than if a more in-
cremental approach were taken (De Dreu & West, 2001; Moscovici,
1980).

Team behavior
As an instrument of leader influence, vanguard groups are not only

representatives of new socio-political relationships, but they are also
agents of change in helping to shift public consciousness. Debord along
with the S.I. created and implemented a number of tactics with which
to directly attack status quo understanding of the social environment
along with providing solutions. These tactics, such as detournement and
the “construction of situations”, were designed to break social norms
and help people reconnect with themselves, each other, and their en-
vironment in ways that were not directly or implicitly socially en-
gineered by the status quo (Marcy, 2015). With detournement, the S.I.
would strip the dialogue from cultural objects, such as comics and films,
and replace this dialogue with S.I.-informed theory. With the Alt Right,
Walt Bismarck has repurposed old Walt Disney movies in the same way
to help spread Alt Right ideas related to IQ and immigration. In a si-
milar fashion, Alt Right ‘trolls’ (anonymous members of the Alt Right)
have helped spread their message on the internet through the use of
provocative “memes”, further co-opting status quo cultural objects.

The S.I.'s ‘construction of situations' was an attempt to create social
situations that were free from the contaminating aspects of elite social
conditioning; to jar people out of their false consciousness, and thus
help them create more meaningful social relationships (Debord, 1967;
Debord, 2009; Kaufmann, 2006). In a similar fashion, anonymous
members of the Alt Right have instigated a number of “real world”
interventions, such as the “It's OK to be White” campaign; a poster
campaign which was designed to provoke the public and prompt white
identity consciousness. Through these social and cultural engagements,

vanguard leaders are hoping that they are ‘waking people up’ (i.e.,
sensebreaking) and offering them an enticing vision (sensegiving) of
how new social relationships might work.

Inter-organizational and societal level traits, skills, and behaviours

Vanguard leader as credible public figure
Being a vanguard leader in the public eye is somewhat of a balan-

cing act akin to the balancing act implied by some theories of humor
(this comparison is no small point, as humor has often played an im-
portant role in vanguard strategy and tactics). Some theories of humor,
such as benign violation theory (McGraw & Warren, 2010), suggest that
humor may come from moral violations that are simultaneously seen as
benign; said another way, for something to be funny, it needs to both
break moral norms and be acceptable on some level. Similarly, for a
vanguard leader to be optimally influential, they need to not only be
someone who is provocatively breaking the norms that society
espouses, but – at the same time –also need to be a credible public
figure (i.e., someone who is, at least on some levels, a socially accep-
table person).

As vanguard leaders are in contestation with the status quo and
status quo institutions, there are many forms of power and influence
that are not under their control, such as reward power or coercive
power, and thus cannot help in establishing their legitimacy (Yukl,
2009). To be influential with the general public, vanguard leaders must
work towards acquiring and leveraging other forms of power, such as
informational and expertise power. To be a true expert in the eyes of the
public, however, is more than just having an important and helpful
body of knowledge and skills at the ready; a vanguard leader must also
look and behave like an expert to be accepted by the public as one
(Shanteau, 1992; Shanteau et al., 2000). This means that a vanguard
leader must take steps to executing behaviours that the public would
recognize as being those of an expert.

One way in which a vanguard leader can more readily be accepted
as an expert is in the publication of authoritative texts (Marcy, 2015).
As head of the S.I., Guy Debord wrote several highly influential books,
the most important arguably being The Society of the Spectacle (Debord,
1967). In this book, Debord details some of the S.I.'s most important
critiques related to commodity fetishism, the mass media, and the
‘spectacle’ – the commodification and domination of social relation-
ships in Western society by the media and other ‘spectacular’ devices as
designed and implemented by the status quo, leading average people to
live disconnected and increasingly meaningless lives that are in essence
“scripted” by elites and intended to serve them (Hussey, 2001;
Kaufmann, 2006; Merrifield, 2005). Debord also wrote or co-wrote a
number of articles within the Situationiste Internationale, the official
journal of the S.I.

Similarly, leaders within the Alt Right, such as Jared Taylor and
Kevin MacDonald, have published extensively, in both the more aca-
demic, as well as in the popular, literature. Kevin MacDonald is a well-
published, retired academic who has written a number of scholarly,
peer-reviewed articles in addition to his popular-press publications in
support of Alt Right political positions. Jared Taylor, who has also
published widely, has been described by both his supporters and his
critics as someone who brings a “measure of intellectualism and ser-
iousness” to the Alt Right (SPLC, 2018), as well as having a “cultivated,
cosmopolitan” approach (Roddy, 2005).

The establishment of vanguard leader credibility, to include the
vision of the vanguard, is also furthered through the actions of the
immediate vanguard group. As suggested in the group-level behavior
analysis, vanguard groups are not only tools to execute particular lea-
dership tasks (such as the publishing of persuasive texts and other dis/
information campaigns), but they are also effective as demonstration
projects, signaling to the public how and why the new norms and be-
haviours encouraged by the vanguard lead to better outcomes for
themselves and their relationship to others (Mumford, 2002). In the

R.T. Marcy The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101372

8



case of Debord and the S.I., a large contingent of the students of both
the University of Paris and the University of Strasbourg, were clearly
influenced by Debord and the S.I. Emulating the S.I. through the de-
velopment of their own Situationist-based theory and praxis, some
students created and disseminated the pamphlet, On the Poverty of
Student Life, which some scholars have credited with leading to the
further dissemination of Situationist ideas, and the eventual crisis of
May 1968 (Plant, 1992).

In a similar fashion, leaders such as Milo Yiannopoulos of the Alt
Lite – a more moderate, but larger offshoot of the Alt Right – garnered
more media attention and were even more influential in creating the
political space on the Right that allowed figures such as Jordan
Peterson and Donald Trump to become even more prominent (Nagle,
2017). It is clear from these examples that the association with, and
successful cultivation and recruitment of, other socially-credible fig-
ures, as well as the creation of a larger support bloc (e.g., students of the
Sorbonne, members of the Alt Lite) can further contribute to vanguard
leader credibility. The recruitment of socially credible people also helps
ensure better vanguard group outcomes as these types of members are
often more stable and more capable than those with no social cred-
ibility.

Vanguard leader as provocateur
While a certain amount of credibility is essential for vanguard in-

fluence, a vanguard leader's ultimate goal is not public acceptance but
public provocation and eventual opinion shift. This shift is often
achieved by vanguard leaders through uncompromising public debates
and other sensational public displays. Along with being intriguing en-
ough to capture and maintain the public's attention (no mean feat in
any era, but particularly in our own with as many channels competing
for our interest), public engagements should serve at least two key
functions (although it is often enough that they serve one or the other):

1. A sensebreaking function, wherein the sensational message or
messages being conveyed define and highlight status quo ap-
proaches as problematic (i.e., a provocative function); and,

2. A sensegiving function, wherein the sensational message or mes-
sages being conveyed define and highlight vanguard solutions as
viable alternatives to the status quo (i.e., a credibility function).

Debord and the S.I. engaged in a number of provocative tactics in
their ongoing battle with the status quo, to include their use of
détournement of popular forms of media, as well as their involvement
in contentious - and well-publicized – public debates. As defined in the
Internationale Situationniste #1, détournement is “short for
détournement of preexisting aesthetic elements” (Debord, 1958). In
practice this meant taking everyday cultural materials (for example,
popular magazines, cartoons, and films) and then editing them to:

1. Highlight the bankrupt nature of status quo norms and relationships;
and

2. Replace status quo implied and explicit notions with text and images
that would reflect Situationist solutions.

As noted previously, vanguard groups typically favor direction
confrontation with elites, often through mass market media channels,
as collaboration is not a viable option given their mission (Nelson &
Prilleltensky, 2005). Through détournement, Debord and the S.I. sub-
verted mass-market cultural forms by replacing status quo notions
found within them with Situationist-informed solutions,3 thereby

helping to first break maladaptive assumptions and then promote a shift
in public consciousness (Foldy et al., 2008).

Debord further promoted these shifts to Situationist ideas through
often contentious, public engagements. In one of the most outrageous
interviews at London's Institute for Contemporary Arts, Debord was
asked in a panel, “what is Situationism?” to which he responded in
French, “We're not here to answer cuntish questions,” and then stood up
and walked out (Home, 1991). There was an immediate uproar and this
incident went on to become infamous, thereby further catapulting Guy
Debord and the Situationist International into the public eye.

This incident is a good example of Debord's ability to create pro-
vocations that capture the public's attention and continue to resonate
after the incident has passed; it also highlights Debord's refusal to
collaborate or be co-opted by the mainstream, to even include the at-
tempt at public understanding through the use of terms that Debord
considered constraining. It is clear from all of this that Debord and the
S.I. were one of the more uncompromising vanguard groups of the past
century (Hussey, 2001; Kaufmann, 2006; Merrifield, 2005).

Taking a page from the S.I. playbook, leaders and group members in
the Alt Right have also engaged in tactics such as détournement, as well
as been involved in contentious, well-publicized public debates.
Richard Spencer and Jared Taylor have both engaged in highly con-
troversial public debates on the topics of race, IQ, and immigration,
along with hosting conferences and rallies in which Alt Right ideas have
been actively promoted in both the mainstream press and social media.
Some well-established members of the Alt Right, such as Walt Bismarck,
have used détournement to give new meanings to old Walt Disney films,
while Alt Right trolls have employed détournement for “meme-making”
on the internet.

Vanguard leadership theories and future directions

Individual-level leadership theories and future directions

Earlier, it was suggested that vanguard leaders often exhibit a set of
similar attributes that appear to be helpful in the leadership of van-
guards. Some of these attributes included both traits and skills. In terms
of traits, it's clear that it would be helpful to turn to the wider, leader
personality literature to see what constructs might further contribute to
our understanding of vanguard leadership. Given the contentious
nature of the role, along with the inevitable social opprobrium, van-
guard leaders clearly need to be resilient, as well as be able to work
through potential mass social rejection (along with potential violence
from both state and independent actors). Self-esteem management,
particularly as a measure of positive social approval, becomes an im-
portant skill to have.

Other general traits that are likely to be important to vanguard
leadership are contrarianism (Runco, 1999), conformity (Sheldon,
1999), conventionality (Pariser, 1999), as well as (a lack of) need for
social acceptance. While present research seems to suggest that there
are not likely to be serious pathologies amongst vanguard leaders, it is
likely however that particular traits run through different vanguards,
depending on their socio-political approach. For example, Alizadeh and
colleagues found that a need for certainty was particularly important to
some far right groups (Alizadeh et al., 2019).

This focus in the literature on members of extreme groups such as
the Alt Right (Forscher & Kteily, 2017) points to a number of inter-
esting, and potentially contradictory, future suggestions for vanguard
leadership research; namely, should we expect the same personality
profile from the leaders of vanguards as we do from those that are
group members? For example, while some research in the creativity
literature has suggested that those that hold more conservative

3 For one of the more sophisticated and funny examples of this approach,
please see Can Dialectics Break Bricks? by Rene Vienet: http://www.ubu.com/
film/vienet_dialectics.html For a snippet, see here: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=IEzrMGnRST4

(footnote continued)
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Can_Dialectics_Break_Bricks%3F

R.T. Marcy The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101372

9

http://www.ubu.com/film/vienet_dialectics.html
http://www.ubu.com/film/vienet_dialectics.html
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IEzrMGnRST4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IEzrMGnRST4
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Can_Dialectics_Break_Bricks%3F


viewpoints are less creative (Tyagi, Hanoch, Choma, & Denham, 2018),
the intellectual and artistic production of Alt Right leaders, to include
the innovativeness of their socio-political tactics, would suggest
otherwise. This contradiction points to the need for more research into
vanguard leadership and vanguard leaders.

In terms of skills, one particularly important area to explore would
be in the area of cognition; namely, leader cognition skills. As the
primary goal of a vanguard leader is to prompt a socio-political shift in
the public's consciousness, a strong understanding of how this process
works is vitally important. Marcy (2015) has proposed that this shift
can be enacted by vanguard leaders and their groups through a sense-
making process. The process begins with first having a strong under-
standing of the general public's mental model of society and politics, as
well as a prescriptive mental model that is the foundation for the
vanguard leader's vision for socio-political change. The vanguard
leader, along with the vanguard group, then creates and implements
tactics that help ‘break’ concepts and relationships within this general
public mental model, which then creates the space for ‘sensegiving’
approaches to fill the gap.

These different steps are typically served through different roles
within vanguards, with front-line activists often being the ‘sense-
breakers’ through provocative assaults on mainstream culture, and in-
tellectuals often being the ‘sensegivers’ through their production of
authoritative texts. While this process has been theorized, the leader
cognitive skills underpinning this particular vanguard social change
process have not been detailed or empirically investigated. Leader
cognitive skills such as scanning and forecasting will likely prove im-
portant.

Group-level leadership theories and future directions

Similar to the individual level, the available research literature at
the group-level presents a number of interesting questions and chal-
lenges in determining its applicability towards better understanding
vanguard leadership. For example, vanguard leaders and vanguard
leadership has much in common with revolutionary leadership, social
movement leadership, and political party leadership. Within these
forms of leadership, the role of charisma is often a fundamental com-
ponent of leader-follower relationships, with followers often wanting to
identify with, and even emulate, some of these leaders; which leaders
then leverage to accomplish group goals. For vanguards, however,
leaders are often as combative internally as they are externally, often
sowing long-lasting acrimony, and distancing other group members;
and unlike some social movements and political parties, these group
members often have strong identities and social credibility, resulting in
a less than a need for a charismatic relationship. If not all vanguard
leaders depend on charisma to influence followers, then what do they
do to achieve group outcomes?

Given that vanguards are often made up of intellectuals, activists,
and artists, there is some evidence to suggest that a more pragmatic or
ideological form of leadership is needed to influence group members
(Mumford, Licuanan, Marcy, Dailey, & Blair, 2006). Rather than di-
rectly appeal to followers' identities, some scholars have suggested that
some leaders carefully delineate category boundaries, differentiating
the status quo and its interests from the interests of the vanguard.
Leaders establish the boundaries of who is considered to be a part of the
group and a part of the status quo, which helps to reinforce an “us”
versus “them” phenomenon. With respect to contesting the status quo,
leaders present a vision that reflects the collective social identity and
conveys a shared alternative social reality (Subašić, Reynolds, Reicher,
& Klandermans, 2012; Haslam et al., 2010). This envisioned reality
“simultaneously marginalizes proponents of the status quo as ‘them’
while aligning the rest of ‘us’ with a change agenda” (Subašić,
Reynolds, & Turner, 2008 as cited in Subašić et al., 2012).

The orchestration of this divide between “us” and “them” also fur-
ther points to the leadership need to manage the stress that comes with

being group deviants on the outside of society (Bader & Baker, 2019;
Chang, Turan, & Chow, 2015; Plucker & Runco, 1999; Williams, 2011).
While there are unique, positive advantages that come with being a
leader and member of a vanguard facing social rejection, such as the
added fuel for creativity it brings (Kim et al., 2013), as well as added
group cohesion and respect for group leaders (Linden & Klandermans,
2006), leaders of vanguards still must provide any emotional and fi-
nancial resources that are available to support their followers during
spikes in social disapproval.

While the present study primarily concentrated on vanguard group
members for a group-level review, there are other groups that are also
worthy of study to gain a deeper understanding of vanguard leadership;
for example, the ‘status quo’ or society's elites (Milner Jr., 2015; Peffley
& Rohrschneider, 2007). Both of these terms are often employed in
critical analyses of vanguards (Gramsci, 1971), but are often much less
defined in other disciplines and empirical studies. While there is quite a
bit of research on how elites and their organizations have responded to
pressure from related groups, such as interest groups (Julian, Ofori-
Dankwa, & Justis, 2008), it would aid our understanding of vanguard
leadership to empirically test how and in what way elites are affected
by specifically vanguard positioning and tactics. Other groups of van-
guard leadership research interest would be the mainstream media,
political enemies (such as opposing vanguards), their base – meaning
people who already support the vanguard's socio-political positions but
are not active members of the vanguard or politically mobilized yet
(i.e., a part of sympathetic social movements or political organizations)
(Schönberger & Raemy, 2018) - and the ‘masses’ in general (Jonsson,
2013; Reicher, Drury, Hopkins, & Stott, 2001).

Mass societal-level leadership theories and future directions

While a large amount of theoretical work has been done on van-
guard leadership in critical, art, and philosophical studies (Gramsci,
1971; Home, 1991; Wood, 2002), much less work has been done in
other disciplines, particularly as it pertains to practice (Ganz &
McKenna, 2017; Ganz & McKenna, 2019). The social movement lea-
dership literature – arguably, one of the largest contributors to our
understanding of vanguard leadership vis a vis social movement lea-
dership (as suggested earlier, social movement leadership and revolu-
tionary leadership are often conflated with vanguard leadership) – has
had a tendency to focus more on constraints and other structural, rather
than agentic, conditions (Ganz & McKenna, 2019; Guillén, 2010). This
approach has helped in our understanding of important social move-
ment leadership phenomena such as the role of elites, history, and
networks (Ganz & McKenna, 2019), all of which play a role in better
understanding vanguard leadership. This emphasis towards structure,
and away from agency, within the social movement literature however
has resulted in “a scarcity of research into the way in which movement
leaders function” (Klandermans, 1997, p. 133).

If this is true of the social movement leadership literature in general,
it is certainly true of the vanguard leadership literature. As noted be-
fore, some studies, such as Downton's Rebel Leadership (Downton,
1973), are – by the definitions we have provided in the present effort –
studies of vanguard leadership; but these studies are few and far be-
tween. Even rarer are studies of social movement leadership that draw
from more than one or two disciplines, with most reviews remaining
within one body of knowledge.

Moving forward, it is clear that the investigation of vanguard lea-
dership will have to be a multidisciplinary effort. In addition to critical
theory, media studies, and political philosophy, disciplines such as so-
ciology, psychology, political science, and cultural studies all offer
important lenses in which to view vanguard leadership. For example,
Rucht (2012) and Yaziji and Doh (2013) both discuss the importance of
leadership, identity, and ideology in the leadership of social move-
ments; this has strong overlap with the political psychological literature
(Feldman, 2013; Jost, Federico, & Napier, 2009), which also stresses the

R.T. Marcy The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101372

10



importance of identity in political ideology, and has further overlap
with the general psychological literature on worldviews (Koltko-Rivera,
2004) – an important leverage point for vanguard leaders, as world-
views are what vanguard leaders are targeting and prompting to shift.

Research on the leadership of social change organizations (Ospina &
Foldy, 2010) has suggested that prompting cognitive shifts is a key
leadership practice, a practice that is supported by the use of key lea-
dership cognitive skills, such as sensemaking and planning, found in the
leader cognition literature on solving complex problems (Marcy, 2015;
Mumford, Todd, Higgs, & McIntosh, 2017), which then brings us back
again to the literature on vanguard leadership and the ways in which
Guy Debord was a strategic thinker (Shukaitis, 2014). All of these
phenomena are important to integrate into a more holistic under-
standing of vanguard leadership.

Conclusion

This article aimed to undertake a comprehensive review and theo-
retical integration of relevant work related to the leadership of van-
guard groups. In doing so, this article attempted to provide some de-
finition towards the construct of socio-political vanguard leadership;
namely, leaders of groups that are somewhat autonomous from estab-
lished political parties or social movements, and that are deliberately
not a direct part of the political process. Vanguard leaders work to in-
fluence ideas and shift public consciousness in order to create the socio-
political conditions for actors and groups to better effect political
change. In this respect, vanguards are distinct from both social move-
ments leaders as well as status quo political leaders, particularly in the
lack of goals to become a part of mainstream decision-making. The
military applications of the term ‘vanguard’ as being a separate, for-
ward front also speaks to this idea of a vanguard being apart from the
mainstream; in a socio-political context, the vanguard is identified by
the introduction of new beliefs and norms that directly challenge those
of the wider society.

The review of the literature on (but not excluded to) social move-
ment leaders, political leadership, and advocacy/artist collectives
highlight some particularly interesting gaps. The extant literature per-
taining to avant-gardes and/or leadership within fringe socio-political
contexts is heavily grounded in critical theory and the study of social
movements. These works have contributed greatly to our understanding
of the context of socio-political change, as well as the role that lea-
dership can play in bringing this about; more work, however, on the
practice of vanguard leadership would be advantageous to deepening
our understanding of how particular leadership tactics influence and
shape ideas within smaller collectives as well as larger societies. More
specifically, this article identified that the goal of vanguard leaders – to
shift the dominant worldview of public consciousness in order to allow
space for later groups to further political agendas – is necessarily hostile
towards established elites while at the same time not directly vying for
elite power. Attending to this goal thus invites strategies that are geared
less towards collaboration and more towards agitation tactics. In ad-
dition, socio-political vanguard leaders attend to different specific goals
at different levels of analysis: amongst others, the individual level re-
quires leader cognitive skills related to creativity and social innovation;
the group level requires the leadership skills to form, cohere, and guide
a team; and the societal level requires the creation, implementation,
and the hopeful adoption of a prescriptive mental model by the public
through unconventional means.

Using historical examples of the Futurist art movement of the early
1900s and the Situationist International of the 1960s, this article ana-
lyzes the goals and strategies of the vanguard leaders within these
movements to illustrate parallels to the present-day Alt-Right move-
ment in the West. In doing so, some future directions for research are
suggested. First, the focus on the individual level of cognitive abilities
of vanguard leaders, in line with the area of social innovation that is
radical but non-violent, and of leaders that seek to shape mainstream

worldviews but not takeover the existing reigns of political power.
Second, a deeper examination of the strategies employed to achieve the
central goal of mindshare, and the intersection of new technologies
with vanguard ideas. Third, longer-term inspection of the effects of
different vanguard leaders on existing socio-political beliefs and values,
to trace the impact of vanguard ideas on mainstream culture. Taken
together, this article proposes that these insights offer a potentially rich
area of future work within leadership studies.

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank David Day, the LQYR Editor, and the anon-
ymous reviewers for their time and effort in providing very helpful
feedback on this article. I would also like to thank Debra Torok and
Madison Douglas for their early efforts in providing research assistance
to this endeavor.

References

Alizadeh, M., Weber, I., Cloffi-Revilla, C., Forunato, S., & Macy, M. (2019). Psychology
and morality of political extremists: Evidence from twitter language analysis of alt-
right and Antifa. EPJ Data Science, 8(17), 1–35. https://doi.org/10.1140/epjds/
s13866-019-0193-9.

Aminzade, R., Goldstone, J. A., & Perry, E. J. (2001). Leadership dynamics and dynamics
of contention. In R. R. Aminzade, J. A. Goldstone, D. McAdam, E. J. Perry, W. H.
SewellJr., S. Tarrow, & C. Tilly (Eds.). Silence and voice in the study of contentious
politics (pp. 126–154). New York: Cambridge University Press.

Ansburg, P. I., & Hill, K. (2003). Creative and analytic thinkers differ in their use of
attentional resources. Personality and Individual Differences, 34, 1141–1152.

Bader, C. D., & Baker, J. O. (2019). Deviance management: Insiders, outsiders, hiders, and
drifters. Oakland, CA: University of California Press.

Basadur, M. S. (2004). Leading others to think innovatively together: Creative leadership.
Leadership Quarterly, 15, 103–121.

Berghaus, G. (1996). Futurism and politics: Between anarchist rebellion and fascist reaction,
1909–1944. Providence, RI: Berghahn Books.

Byrne, C. L., Mumford, M. D., Barrett, J. D., & Vessey, W. B. (2009). Examining the leaders
of creative efforts: What do they do, and what do they think about? Creativity and
Innovation Management, 18, 256–268.

Caiani, M., & Borri, R. (2016). Beyond party politics: The search for a unified approach.
Research on radical right-wing movements in Europe. In O. Fillieule, & G. Accornero
(Eds.). Social movement studies in Europe: The state of the art (pp. 69–85). New York:
Berghahn.

Caughron, J. J., Shipman, A. S., Beeler, C. K., & Mumford, M. D. (2009). Social innova-
tion: Thinking about changing the system. The International Journal of Creativity &
Problem Solving, 19(1), 7–32.

Chang, J. W., Turan, N., & Chow, R. M. (2015). A desire for deviance: The influence of
leader normativeness and inter-group competition on group member support. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 56, 36–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2014.08.
006.

De Dreu, C. K. W., & West, M. A. (2001). Minority dissent and team innovation: The
importance of participation in decision making. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(6),
1191–1201. https://doi.org/10.1037//0021-9010.86.6.1191.

Debord (1967). The Society of the Spectacle, translation by Fredy Perlman and Jon Supak.
London: Black & Red. Retrieved 20 May. 2014, from http://library.nothingness.org/
articles/SI/en/pub_contents/4.

Debord, G. (1958). Definitions. Internationale Situationniste #1. Translated by ken Knabb.
Debord, G. (2004). Panegyric. London: Verso.
Debord, G. (2009). Correspondence: The foundation of the Situationist international (June

1957–august 1960). Los Angeles: Semiotext.
Downton, J. V. (1973). Determinants of commitment. Rebel leadership: Commitment and

charisma in the revolutionary process (pp. 57–83). Free Press.
Feldman, S. (2013). Political ideology. In L. Huddy, D. O. Sears, & J. S. Levy (Eds.). The

Oxford handbook of political psychology(2nd ed.). https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/
9780199760107.013.0019.

Foldy, E. G., Goldman, L., & Ospina, S. (2008). Sensegiving and the role of cognitive shifts
in the work of leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 19, 514–529.

Forscher, P., & Kteily, N. (2017). A psychological profile of the alt-right. PsyArXiv.
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/c9uvw August 9.

Förster, J., Friedman, R. S., Butterbach, E. B., & Sassenberg, K. (2005). Automatic effects
of deviancy cues on creative cognition. European Journal of Social Psychology, 35,
345–359.

Ganz, M., & McKenna, E. (2019). Bringing leadership back in. In D. A. Snow, S. A. Soule,
H. Kriesi, & H. J. McCammon (Eds.). The Wiley Blackwell companion to social move-
ments (pp. 185–202). (2nd ed.). John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Ganz, M., & McKenna, L. (23 June 2017). The practice of social movement leadership.
Mobilizing Ideas. Retrieved from https://mobilizingideas.wordpress.com/2017/06/
23/the-practice-of-social-movement-leadership/.

Gioia, D. A., & Chittipeddi, K. (1991). Sensemaking and sensegiving in strategic change
initiation. Strategic Management Journal, 12, 433–448.

Graen, G. B., & Uhl-Bien, M. (1995). The relationship-based approach to leadership:

R.T. Marcy The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101372

11

https://doi.org/10.1140/epjds/s13866-019-0193-9
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjds/s13866-019-0193-9
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0050
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2014.08.006
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2014.08.006
https://doi.org/10.1037//0021-9010.86.6.1191
http://library.nothingness.org/articles/SI/en/pub_contents/4
http://library.nothingness.org/articles/SI/en/pub_contents/4
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0085
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199760107.013.0019
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199760107.013.0019
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0100
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/c9uvw
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0125
https://mobilizingideas.wordpress.com/2017/06/23/the-practice-of-social-movement-leadership/
https://mobilizingideas.wordpress.com/2017/06/23/the-practice-of-social-movement-leadership/
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0145


Development of LMX theory of leadership over 25 years: Applying a multi-level,
multi-domain perspective. Leadership Quarterly, 6(2), 219–247.

Gramsci, A. (1971). Selections from the prison notebooks. London: Lawrence and Wishart.
Guillén, M. F. (2010). Classical sociological approaches to the study of leadership. In N.

Nohria, & R. Khurana (Eds.). Handbook of leadership theory and practice (pp. 223–238).
Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation.

Hafez, M., & Mullins, C. (2015). The radicalization puzzle: A theoretical synthesis of
empirical approaches to homegrown extremism. Studies in Conflict & Terrorism,
38(11), 958–975. https://doi.org/10.1080/1057610X.2015.1051375.

Haslam, S. A., Reicher, S. D., & Platow, M. J. (2010). The new psychology of leadership:
Identity, influence and power. East Sussex, England: Psychology Press.

Home, S. (1991). The assault on culture: Utopian currents from lettrisme to class war.
Scotland, UK: Aproria Press.

Hussey, A. (2001). The game of war: The life and death of guy Debord. London: Random
House.

Jonsson, S. (2013). Crowds and democracy: The idea and image of the masses from revolution
to fascism. New York: Columbia University Press.

Jost, J. T., Federico, C. M., & Napier, J. L. (2009). Political ideology: Its structure,
functions, and elective affinities. Annual Review of Psychology, 60, 307–337.

Julian, S. D., Ofori-Dankwa, J. C., & Justis, R. T. (2008). Understanding strategic re-
sponses to internet group pressures. Strategic Management Journal, 29, 963–984.

Kaufmann, V. (2006). Guy Debord: Revolution in the service of poetry. Minneapolis:
University of Minneapolis Press.

Kim, S. H., Vincent, L. C., & Goncalo, J. A. (2013). Outside advantage: Can social rejection
fuel creative thought? Journal of Experimental Psychology, 142(3), 605–611.

Klandermans, B. (1997). The social psychology of protest. Oxford, Cambridge, Mass:
Blackwell Publishers.

Koltko-Rivera, M. E. (2004). The psychology of worldviews. Review of General Psychology,
8(1), 3–58.

Leary, M. R., & Terdal, S. K. (1995). Self-esteem as an interpersonal monitor: The so-
ciometer hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68(3), 518–530.

Lenin, V. I. (1973). What is to be done? Burning questions of our movement. Connecticut:
Martino Publishing.

Ligon, G. S., Hunter, S. T., & Mumford, M. D. (2008). Development of outstanding lea-
dership. A life narrative approach. The Leadership Quarterly, 19, 312–334.

Linden, A., & Klandermans, B. (2006). Stigmatization and repression of extreme-right
activism in the Netherlands. Mobilization: An International Quarterly, 11(2), 213–228.

Lindholm, C., & Zúquete, J. P. (2010). The struggle for the world: Liberation movements for
the 21st century. Stanford University Press.

Lockett, A., Currie, G., Finn, R., Martin, G., & Waring, J. (2014). The influence of social
position on sensemaking about organizational change. Academy of Management
Journal, 57(4), 1102–1129.

Maitlis, S. (2005). The social processes of organizational Sensemaking. Academy of
Management Journal, 48(1), 21–49.

Maitlis, S., & Lawrence, T. B. (2007). Triggers and enablers of sensegiving in organiza-
tions. Academy of Management Journal, 50(1), 57–84.

Marcy, R. T. (2015). Breaking mental models as a form of creative destruction: The role of
leader cognition in radical social innovations. The Leadership Quarterly, 26, 3.

Marcy, R. T. (2019). Why the alt right is not going anywhere (regardless of what we call
it). In P. Gottfried (Ed.). Perspectives on conservatism: The vanishing traditionNorthern
Illinois University Press in-press).

McGraw, A. P., & Warren, C. (2010). Benign violations: making immoral behavior funny.
Psychological Science, 21(8), 1141–1149.

Merrifield, A. (2005). Guy Debord. London: Reaktion Books Ltd.
Milner, M., Jr. (2015). Elites: A general model. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Moscovici, S. (1980). Toward a theory of conversion behavior. Advances in Experimental

Social Psychology, 13, 209–239. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2601(08)60133-1.
Moxley, R. S., & Pulley, M. L. (2004). Hardships. In C. D. McCauley, & E. Van Velsor

(Eds.). Handbook of leadership development (pp. 183–203). (2nd ed.). San Francisco,
CA: Jossey-Bass & The Center for Creative Leadership.

Moyer, B., with McAllister, J., Finley, M. L., & Soifer, S. (2001). Doing democracy: The
MAP model for organizing social movements. Canada: British Columbia Arts Council.

Mumford, M. D. (2002). Social innovation: Ten cases from Benjamin Franklin. Creativity
Research Journal, 14, 253–266.

Mumford, M. D., Espego, J., Hunter, S. T., Bedell-Avers, K. E., Eubanks, D. L., & Connelly,
S. (2007). The sources of leader violence: A comparison of ideological and non-
ideological leaders. The Leadership Quarterly, 18, 217–235.

Mumford, M. D., Licuanan, B., Marcy, R. T., Dailey, L., & Blair, C. (2006). Political tactics
– Getting ahead: How charismatic, ideological, and pragmatic leaders use influence
tactics. In M. D. Mumford (Ed.). Pathways to outstanding leadership: A comparative
analysis of charismatic, ideological and pragmatic leaders (pp. 190–212). New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc.

Mumford, M. D., Scott, G. M., Gaddis, B., & Strange, J. M. (2002). Leading creative
people: Orchestrating expertise and relationships. The Leadership Quarterly, 13(6),
705–750.

Mumford, M. D., Todd, E. M., Higgs, C., & McIntosh, T. (2017). Cognitive skills and
leadership performance: The nine critical skills. The Leadership Quarterly, 28, 24–39.

Nagle, A. (2017). Kill all Normies: Online culture wars from 4Chan and Tumblr to trump and
the alt-right. Winchester, UK: Zero Books.

Nelson, G., & Prilleltensky, I. (2005). Social interventions. In G. Nelson, & I. Prilleltensky

(Eds.). Community psychology: In pursuit of liberation and well-being (pp. 160–183).
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Ospina, S., & Foldy, E. (2010). Building bridges from the margins: The work of leadership
in social change organizations. The Leadership Quarterly, 21, 292–307.

Pariser, D. A. (1999). Conventionality. In S. R. Pritzker (Ed.). Encyclopedia of creativity
(pp. 373–383). (1st ed.). Academic Press.

Peffley, M., & Rohrschneider, R. (2007). Elite beliefs and the theory of democratic elitism.
In R. J. Dalton, & H. D. Klingemann (Eds.). The Oxford handbook of political behavior
(pp. 65–79). UK: Oxford University Press.

Plant, S. (1992). The most radical gesture: The Situationist international in a postmodern age.
New York: Routledge.

Plucker, J. A., & Runco, M. A. (1999). Deviance. In S. R. Pritzker (Ed.). Encyclopedia of
creativity (pp. 541–545). (1st ed.). Academic Press.

Pratt, M. G. (2000). The good, the bad, and the ambivalent: Managing identification
among Amway distributors. Administrative Science Quarterly, 45, 456–493.

Reicher, S., Drury, J., Hopkins, N., & Stott, C. (2001). A model of crowd prototypes and
crowd leadership. In C. Barker, A. Johnson, & M. Lavalette (Eds.). Leadership and
social movements (pp. 178–195). Manchester University Press.

Rejai, M., & Phillips, K. (1979). Leaders of revolution. Vol. 73, Incorporated: SAGE
Publications55–66.

Roddy, D. (2005). Jared Taylor, a racist in the guise of ‘expert.’. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. 23
January 2005. Accessed May 19, 2019 http://www.post-gazette.com/life/dennis-
roddy/2005/01/23/Jared-Taylor-a-racist-in-the-guise-of-expert/stories/
200501230176.

Kabanoff, & Rossiter, J. R. (1994). Recent developments in applied creativity.
International Review of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 9, 283–324.

Rucht, D. (2012). Leadership in social and political movements: A comparative ex-
ploration. Comparative political leadership (pp. 99–118). London: Palgrave Macmillan.

Runco, M. A. (1999). Contrarianism. In S. R. Pritzker (Ed.). Encyclopedia of creativity (pp.
367–371). (1st ed.). Academic Press.

Schönberger, K., & Raemy, D. (2018). Strategies of outrage: Protest in the identitarian
movement. In B. Rogger, J. Voegeli, R. Widmer, & M. Zürich (Eds.). Protest: The
aesthetics of resistance (pp. 290–295). Zurich: Lars Müller Publishers.

Scott, G. M., Lonergan, D. C., & Mumford, M. D. (2005). Conceptual combination:
Alternative knowledge structures, alternative heuristics. Creativity Research Journal,
17, 79–98.

Shanteau, J. (1992). Competence in experts: The role of task characteristics.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 53, 252–266.

Shanteau, J., Weiss, D. J., Thomas, R., & Pounds, J. (2000). Performance-based assess-
ment of expertise: How can you tell if someone is an expert? European Journal of
Operations Research, 136, 253–263.

Sheldon, K. M. (1999). Conformity. In S. R. Pritzker (Ed.). Encyclopedia of creativity (pp.
341–346). (1st ed.). Academic Press.

Shukaitis, S. (2014). “Theories are made only to die in the war of time”: Guy Debord and
the Situationist international as strategic thinkers. Culture and Organization, 20(4),
251–268. https://doi.org/10.1080/14759551.2012.754223.

Simonton, D. K. (1994). Greatness: Who makes history and why. New York: Guilford Press.
Simonton, D. K. (1999). Eminence. In M. Runco (Vol. Ed.), Encyclopedia of creativity. 1.

Encyclopedia of creativity (pp. 647–657). San Francisco: Academic Press.
Smith, S. M., Ward, T. B., & Finke, R. A. (Eds.). (1995). The creative cognition approach.

Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Specht, H. (1975). Disruptive tactics. In R. M. Kramer, & H. Specht (Eds.). Readings in

community organization practice (pp. 336–348). New York: Prentice-Hall.
SPLC (Southern Poverty Law Center) (2018). Jared Taylor. Retrieved from https://www.

splcenter.org/fighting-hate/extremist-files/individual/jared-taylor.
Stevenson, A. (2010). Oxford dictionary of English. London: Oxford University Press.
Subašić, E., Reynolds, K. J., Reicher, S. D., & Klandermans, B. (2012). Where to from here

for the psychology of social change? Future directions for theory and practice.
Political Psychology, 33(1), 61–74.

Subašić, E., Reynolds, K. J., & Turner, J. C. (2008). The political solidarity model of social
change: Dynamics of self-categorization in intergroup power relations. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 12(4), https://doi.org/10.1177/1088868308323223.

Suedfeld, P., & Rank, A. D. (1976). Revolutionary leaders: Long-term success as a function
of changes in conceptual complexity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
34(2), 169–178.

Tyagi, V., Hanoch, Y., Choma, B., & Denham, S. L. (2018). The “right” side of creativity:
Creative personality and social risk-taking predict political party affiliation. Creativity
Research Journal, 30(4), 451–460. https://doi.org/10.1080/10400419.2018.
1540252.

Williams, J. P. (2011). Subcultural theory: Traditions and concepts. Cambridge, UK: Polity
Press.

Wood, P. (1999). The challenge of the avant-garde. . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Wood, P. (2002). Modernism and the idea of the avant-Garde. In P. Smith, & C. Wilde

(Eds.). A companion to art theory (pp. 215–228). Blackwell Publishing.
Yaziji, M., & Doh, J. P. (2013). The role of ideological radicalism and resource homo-

geneity in social movement organization campaigns against corporations.
Organization Studies, 34(5–6), 755–780. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0170840613479235.

Yukl, G. A. (2009). Leadership in organizations. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

R.T. Marcy The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101372

12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0155
https://doi.org/10.1080/1057610X.2015.1051375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf5000
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf5000
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0305
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2601(08)60133-1
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0410
http://www.post-gazette.com/life/dennis-roddy/2005/01/23/Jared-Taylor-a-racist-in-the-guise-of-expert/stories/200501230176
http://www.post-gazette.com/life/dennis-roddy/2005/01/23/Jared-Taylor-a-racist-in-the-guise-of-expert/stories/200501230176
http://www.post-gazette.com/life/dennis-roddy/2005/01/23/Jared-Taylor-a-racist-in-the-guise-of-expert/stories/200501230176
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0455
https://doi.org/10.1080/14759551.2012.754223
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0495
https://www.splcenter.org/fighting-hate/extremist-files/individual/jared-taylor
https://www.splcenter.org/fighting-hate/extremist-files/individual/jared-taylor
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0510
https://doi.org/10.1177/1088868308323223
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0520
https://doi.org/10.1080/10400419.2018.1540252
https://doi.org/10.1080/10400419.2018.1540252
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf1912
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0590
https://doi.org/10.1177/0170840613479235
https://doi.org/10.1177/0170840613479235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30842-7/rf0600


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

The Leadership Quarterly

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua

Leadership succession in different types of organizations: What business and
political successions may learn from each other
Bassam Faraha,⁎, Rida Eliasa, Cristine De Clercyb, Glenn Rowec
aOlayan School of Business, American University of Beirut, Bliss Street, Beirut, Lebanon
b Political Science Department, Western University, 1255 Western Rd, London, ON N6G 0N1, Canada
c Ivey Business School, Western University, 1255 Western Rd, London, ON N6G 0N1, Canada

A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords:
Leadership succession
CEO succession
Publicly-traded firms
Privately-owned firms
Family businesses
Political entities
Literature review

A B S T R A C T

We systematically review the recent impactful leadership succession literature in three types of organizations/
contexts, namely publicly-traded, privately-owned (mostly family businesses), and political organizations. We
compare and contrast these literatures, and argue that business and political leadership succession researchers
and practitioners can learn from each other. The purpose of the review is fourfold. First, to take stock of the
existing leadership succession research in these three related literatures – that examine the same essential
phenomenon – but that have evolved separately. Previous reviews have focused mostly on CEO succession (not
the broader phenomenon of leadership succession) mainly in publicly-traded firms; and to our knowledge no
(recent) comprehensive literature reviews on the important topics of privately-owned and political organization
leadership succession exist yet. Second, to develop an overarching integrative conceptual framework (ICF) that
structures the overall leadership succession literature and shows the potential areas of integration and difference
among the three literatures. Third, to develop three organizational frameworks – one for each organization type
– that review what we know and what we should know about leadership succession in each type. Fourth, to
critically compare the ICF, the three organizational frameworks, and the three literatures to better understand
the similarities and differences among these literatures. By doing so and using a multidisciplinary approach we
aim to contribute to the field in the following ways. Firstly, we seek to synthesize the field of leadership suc-
cession to identify important research questions that are ripe for study in the near future in the business and
political science disciplines. Secondly, we strive to uncover what succession researchers and practitioners across
these disciplines may learn from each other.

Introduction

Leadership succession is a potentially disruptive inevitable event/
process that every organization faces (Giambatista, Rowe, & Riaz, 2005;
Kesner & Sebora, 1994). Recently, organizations have been dealing
with leadership successions more frequently (Charan, 2005), since top
leaders' average tenure is shortening (Gardner Jr, 2009; Saporito &
Winum, 2012). While planned successions can lead to relatively
smoother transitions and may have minimal or even positive impact on
post-succession performance, unplanned transitions can shake their
organizations hard (Shen & Cannella, 2003; Vancil, 1987).

Various factors can influence an organization's leadership succes-
sion, which in turn, may result in different outcomes. Given the im-
portance of the effects of leadership succession, CEO succession re-
searchers have reviewed the literature almost decennially to

understand the phenomenon and the factors leading to positive and/or
negative CEO succession outcomes in order to advance research and
practice on CEO succession. The three reviews on CEO succession done
by Kesner and Sebora (1994), Giambatista et al. (2005), and Berns and
Klarner (2017) focused on the antecedents and consequences as well as
the event and process of CEO succession, mainly in publicly-traded
firms, without distinguishing between successions in different types of
organizations. These reviews enriched the field by highlighting some of
the gaps, and suggesting interesting directions for future CEO succes-
sion research, mainly in publicly-traded firms. Examining these reviews
in chronological order, readers will notice that some suggested research
in previous reviews has been acted upon in following years, a practice
which informed the field considerably. While, we believe that CEO
succession in publicly-traded organizations still has some untapped
research questions and venues, our paper has a different and broader

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.03.004
Received 1 November 2017; Received in revised form 22 March 2019; Accepted 26 March 2019

⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: bassam.farah@aub.edu.lb (B. Farah), rida.elias@aub.edu.lb (R. Elias), C.Declercy@uwo.ca (C. De Clercy), growe@ivey.ca (G. Rowe).

The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101289

Available online 01 June 2019
1048-9843/ © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

T

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/10489843
https://www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.03.004
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.03.004
mailto:bassam.farah@aub.edu.lb
mailto:rida.elias@aub.edu.lb
mailto:C.Declercy@uwo.ca
mailto:growe@ivey.ca
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.03.004
http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.03.004&domain=pdf


purpose.
Undoubtedly, leadership succession is an important event/process

in the life of organizations, but not only publicly-traded organizations.
Researchers have also studied leadership succession in privately-
owned/family businesses and in political entities. Given that these re-
searchers generally are from different fields/areas and with separate
backgrounds and interests, these three literatures have evolved fairly
separately. Research in these different literatures generally has been
published in different journals/outlets, has used different methodolo-
gies, and has proposed different suggestions and calls for actions. We
argue that leadership successions in these different types of organiza-
tions (i.e. CEOs in publicly-traded and privately-owned firms, and
leaders in political entities) have some common as well as unique
characteristics. To our knowledge, no study has attempted to build
bridges among leadership successions in these three literatures. Our
interest in reviewing leadership succession in these literatures stems
from our conviction that doing so can provide business and political
succession researchers with opportunities to learn from each other,
especially in the wake of some recent critical and unusual political and
business leadership successions (Dionne, 2017).

Fig. 1 represents the overarching Integrative Conceptual Framework
(ICF) that we developed for leadership succession in different organi-
zation types/contexts. This ICF shows 1) the Leadership Succession
Process' potential elements that are common/similar in the three or-
ganization types/contexts (in the big box in the middle of the ICF) and
2) the characteristics of the three organization types/contexts that can
make aspects of this Leadership Succession Process different in each
organization types/context (in the two boxes at the top of the ICF and
the box at the bottom of the ICF). The Leadership Succession Process
box not only summarizes the current state of research on leadership
succession, it also includes variables that have not been studied yet and
that we consider to make important venues for future research.

In the next sections of this paper we review the current state of
leadership succession in each of the three organization types while

briefly comparing and contrasting them with each other. Then we
provide suggestions for future research for each organization type as
well as suggestions for what each type may learn from the other types.
Finally, we conclude by further integrating the three literatures through
additionally focusing on what business and political leadership suc-
cessions may learn from this review and from each other and discussing
the similarities and differences among these three literatures.

To uncover what business and political succession analysts may
learn from each other, we systematically review and organize the recent
impactful leadership succession literature around categories and sub-
categories of research questions that have been studied in the literature
(i.e. what we know) and structure these categories/subcategories under
succession antecedents; succession event, characteristics, and theories;
and, succession consequences. Moreover, we identify important ques-
tions that should be studied in the near future (i.e. what we should
know) for each of the three organization types, namely, publicly-traded,
privately-owned, and political organizations (see Fig. 1 and Tables 1, 2,
and 3).

We do this for the following purposes. First, to take stock of the
recent impactful leadership succession research in these three related
literatures that have evolved separately. This is important, especially
because previous reviews focused on CEO succession mainly in pub-
licly-traded firms and no (recent) comprehensive reviews on the im-
portant topics of privately-owned and political organization leadership
succession exist. Second, to develop an ICF for leadership succession in
different organization types/contexts that structures the three litera-
tures around antecedents, event/characteristics, and consequences and
shows the potential areas of integration and difference among the three
literatures (see Fig. 1). Third, to develop three organizational frame-
works – one for each organization type/context – organized around
research questions (what we know) and future directions (what we
should know) (see Tables 1, 2, and 3). Fourth, to critically compare the
three literatures, organizational frameworks, and ICF to better under-
stand the similarities and differences among these literatures.

Publicly-Traded Organization Context Privately-Owned/Family Organization Context
Public (shareholder) ownership
Relatively dispersed ownership
Relatively liquid shares

Private/Family (investor) ownership
Relatively concentrated ownership
Relatively illiquid shares

Leadership Succession Process

Antecedents of Leadership Succession Event, Characteristics, and Theories of Leadership Succession Consequences of Leadership Succession
Individual

Leader attributes:
Leader (incumbent/successor) characteristics, 
behavior, ownership, compensation, risk, 
performance, &/or legitimacy

Group/Organization
Board/TMT/Firm attributes:

Board/TMT/Firm characteristics, behavior, 
ownership, (compensation), risk, performance, 
legitimacy, &/or strategic change

Elite/Party/Parliament/Government attributes:
Elite/Party/Parliament/ Government 
characteristics, behavior, ownership, risk, 
performance, legitimacy, &/or strategic change

Environment
Cultural, economic, political, &/or 

institutional attributes

Leadership succession event:
Leader change

Leadership succession characteristics:
Internal/external succession
Intra-family/extra-family succession
Planned succession (Moving forward, Completed term, Retirement)
Unplanned succession (Death, Illness, Dismissal, Resignation, 
Interim)
Regular political succession (Elections, Appointment, Heredity, etc.)
Irregular political succession (Coup, Revolution, Conflict, etc.)

Leadership succession theories:
Theories explaining leadership succession

Individual
Leader attributes:

Leader characteristics, behavior, ownership, 
compensation, risk, performance, &/or legitimacy

Group/Organization
Board/TMT/Firm attributes:

Board/TMT/Firm characteristics, behavior, 
ownership, (compensation), risk, performance, 
legitimacy, &/or strategic change

Elite/Party/Parliament/Government attributes:
Elite/Party/ Parliament/Government 
characteristics, behavior, ownership, risk, 
performance, legitimacy, &/or strategic change

Environment 
Cultural, economic, political, &/or 

institutional attributes

Political Organization Context
Democratic Systems
Free & fair elections

Non-Democratic Systems
Elite bargaining
Elections

Mixed Systems
Elite bargaining
Elections
Free & fair elections

Fig. 1. Integrative conceptual framework (ICF) for leadership succession in different organization types/contexts.

B. Farah, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101289

2



Table 1
Themes of studied research questions and proposed future directions for leadership succession in publicly-traded organizations (PTOs).

Articles
First Order or Subcategory 

Themes of Research 
Questions 

Second Order or 
Category Themes of 
Research Questions

Third Order or 
Overall Themes of 

Research Questions

Important Future Directions 
for PTOs

Important Future Directions 
for/from other Literatures

Magnusson and Boggs (2006); Zhu and Shen (2016); You and Du (2012); 
Fitzsimmons and Callan (2016); Wiersema et al. (2018); Campbell et al. 
(2011)

Leader (Incumbent/Successor) 
Characteristics and Succession
Number of Articles = 6

Individual Level 
Antecedents: Leader 
Attributes: Leader 

(Incumbent/Successor) 
Characteristics, 

Behavior, Ownership, 
Compensation, Risk, 
Performance, &/ or 

Legitimacy
Number of Articles = 13

Antecedents of 
Leadership 
Succession 

Number of Articles = 
36

For other literatures: Following 
a scandal, should we fire the 
political leader immediately? If 
yes, do we promote the vice 
leader or look for an outsider, or 
appoint a neutral custodian until 
we find the ‘right” leader?

Wowak et al. (2011); Wang et al. (2017); Inderst and Mueller (2010)
Leader (Incumbent/Successor) 
Compensation and Succession
Number of Articles = 3

Lehn and Zhao (2006); Arthaud-Day et al. (2006); Lee et al. (2012); 
Wiersema and Zhang (2011)

Leader (Incumbent/Successor) 
Performance and Succession
Number of Articles = 4

Zhang (2008); Lau et al. (2009); Davidson et al. (2006); Tian et al. 
(2011); Jung (2014); Balsmeier et al. (2013); Haleblian and Rajagopalan 
(2006)

Board Characteristics and
Succession
Number of Articles = 7

Group/Organizational 

/TMT/Firm Attributes: 
Board/TMT/Firm 
Characteristics, 

Behavior, Ownership, 
(Compensation), Risk, 

Performance, 
Legitimacy, &/or 
Strategic Change

Number of Articles = 16

For other literatures: Should 
there be a transition period? 
Which body should be involved 
in ensuring a smooth transition?Ertugrul and Krishnan (2011); Citrin and Ogden (2010)

Board Compensation/ 
Performance and Succession
Number of Articles = 2

Conyon and He (2014); Hornstein (2013); Fiordelisi and Ricci (2014); 
Bushman et al. (2010); Berry et al. (2006); Mobbs and Raheja (2012); 
Zhang (2006)

Firm Characteristics/Risk/ 
Performance and Succession
Number of Articles = 7

For other literatures: Should 
poor firm performance, be it 
financial, people, or planet lead
to firing the leader? And if so, 
when?

Eisfeldt and Kuhnen (2013); Jenter and Kanaan (2015); Crossland and 
Chen (2013); Chen et al. (2012); Helwege et al. (2012); Marshall et al. 
(2014); Ozelge and Saunders (2012)

Cultural and Institutional 
Attributes and Succession 
Number of Articles = 7

For other literatures:  Do 
different environmental 
attributes require different 
characteristics in a leader?

Zhang and Qu (2016); Pi and Lowe (2011); Mobbs (2013)
Leader Change
Number of Articles = 3

Leadership Succession  
Event

Number of Articles = 3
Event, 

Characteristics, and 
Theories of 
Leadership 
Succession

Number of Articles = 
15

For other literatures: What 
prevents the dismissal of poorly 
performing political leaders?

Tsoulouhas et al. (2007); Boyer and Ortiz- Molina (2008); Davidson et 
al. (2008); Connelly et al. (2016); Georgakakis and Ruigrok (2017); 
Karaevli and Zajac (2012)

Internal/External Succession
Number of Articles = 6 Leadership Succession 

Characteristics
Number of Articles = 12

For other literatures: What 
prevents the dismissal/ 
replacement of poorly 
performing family members?

Ballinger and Marcel (2010); Liang et al. (2012); Mooney et al. (2017); 
Chen et al. (2015)

Planned/Unplanned 
Succession 
Number of Articles = 6

Bornemann et al. (2015); Yermack (2006)
Succession and Leader 
Behavior/Compensation
Number of Articles = 2

Individual Level 
Consequences:

Characteristics, 
Behavior, Ownership, 
Compensation, Risk, 
Performance, &/or 

Legitimacy
Number of Articles = 2

Consequences of 
Leadership 
Succession 

Number of Articles = 
24

For other literatures: What is the 
optimal leadership term for the 
best interest of the country?

From other literatures: Should 
organizations adopt a fixed term 
for their CEOs?

Dikolli et al. (2014)
Succession and Board 
Behavior
Number of Articles = 1

Group/Organization 
Level Attributes: 

For other literatures: What could 
be “people or planet” 

Cao et al. (2006);
Succession and Firm 
Characteristics
Number of Articles = 1

Board/TMT/Firm 
Attributes: Board/TMT/ 

Firm Characteristics, 
Behavior, Ownership, 
(Compensation), Risk, 

Performance, 
Legitimacy, &/or 
Strategic Change

Number of Articles = 22

performance measures for 
political organizations?

Clayton et al. (2005); Karaevli (2007); Schepker et al. (2017); Behn et al. 
(2005); Kato and Long (2006); Bilgili et al. (2017); Quigley et al. (2017); 
Hamori and Koyuncu (2015); Ting (2013); ; Gomulya and Boeker (2014); 
Adams and Mansi (2009); Chung and Luo (2013); Bernard et al. (2016)

Succession and Firm 
Performance 
Number of Articles = 14

For other literatures: Should a 
simple change in the political 
mindset of the new leader, from 
democratic to conservative (or 
vice versa), lead to a strategic 
change in the country’s 
directions even if the country is 

but not others. Examples may 
include changing the managers 
of certain key positions in the 
government to be in line with 
the new leader’s political views.

Lin and Liu (2012); Chiu et al. (2016); Karaevli and Zajac (2013); 
Nakauchi and Wiersema (2015); Elosge et al. (2018); Quigley and 
Hambrick (2012)

Succession and Strategic 
Change
Number of Articles = 6

Following a scandal, should we 
fire the CEO immediately? If yes, 
do we promote internally or hire 
externally, or appoint an interim 
CEO until we find the ‘right” 
leader?

Does CEO power affect the 
relationship between poor 
performance and CEO dismissal 
in cultures other than China?

What role should the board play 
during the CEO transition period?

Should poor firm performance, be 
it financial, people, or planet lead 
to firing the CEO? And if so,  
when? (this question needs 
theoretical as well as empirical 
answers)

Do different environmental
attributes require different  
characteristics in a CEO?

What prevents the dismissal of  
poor performers?

Do fixed CEOship terms improve 
or worsen firm performance?

What could be “people or planet” 
performance measures rather than 
profit/financial performance 
measures?

How can a CEO’s mandate affect  
the link between CEO origin and  
strategic change?

Leader Attributes: Leader 

doing well, or should such a 
change affect only certain areas  

Level Antecedents: Board 

Environmental Level 
Antecedents: Cultural, 

Economic, Political, &/or 
Institutional Attributes
Number of Articles = 7

B
.
Farah,

et
al.

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101289

3



Table 2
Themes of studied research questions and proposed future directions for leadership succession in privately-owned/family organizations (POFOs).

Articles
First Order or Subcategory 

Themes of Research Questions
Second Order or Category 

Themes of Research Questions

Third Order or Overall 
Themes of Research 

Questions

Important Future Directions 
for POFOs

Important Future Directions 
for/from other Literatures

Salvato et al. (2012); Dalpiaz et al. (2014); DeNoble et al. 
(2007)

Successor Characteristics and 
Succession
Number of Articles = 3

Individual Level Antecedents: 
Leader Attributes: Leader 

(Incumbent/Successor) 
Characteristics, Behavior, 
Ownership, Compensation, 

Risk, Performance, &/or 
Legitimacy

Number of Articles = 5 Antecedents of 
Leadership Succession
Number of Articles = 9

How do culture-, country-, and/or 
region-specific gender-related 
beliefs, norms, practices, etc. 
differently influence leadership 
succession processes and 
outcomes in family firms?

For other Literatures: How do 
culture-, country-, and/or region-
specific gender-related beliefs, 
norms, practices, etc. differently 
influence leadership succession 
processes and outcomes in 
monarchies?

Vera and Dean (2005); Haberman and Danes (2007)
Successors’ Gender and 
Succession
Number of Articles = 2

Hillier and McColgan (2009); André (2009); Tsai et al. 
(2009); González et al. (2015)

Firm Performance and 
Succession
Number of Articles = 4

Group/Organizational Level 
Antecedents: Board/TMT/Firm 
Attributes: Board/TMT/Firm 

Characteristics, Behavior, 
Ownership, (Compensation), 

Risk, Performance, Legitimacy, 
&/or Strategic Change
Number of Articles = 4

How are the media influencing 
perceptions on gender and how is 
this influencing leadership 
succession processes and 
decisions in privately-
owned/family firms?

For other literatures: How are the 
media influencing perceptions on 
gender and how is this influencing 
leadership succession processes 
and decisions in monarchies?

De Massis et al. (2016); Lambrecht (2005); Lam (2011); 
McMullen and Warnick (2015); De Massis et al. (2008); 
Salvato and Corbetta (2013); Royer et al. (2008); Jaskiewicz 
et al. (2016); Liu et al. (2015);. 

Intra-Family/Extra-Family 
Succession
Number of Articles = 11

Leadership Succession 
Characteristics

Number of Articles = 17
Event, Characteristics, 

and Theories of 
Leadership Succession 
Number of Articles = 21

How do different national and 
regional characteristics (e.g. 
demographic, cultural, economic, 
regulatory, legal, institutional, 
etc.) influence leadership 
succession processes and 
decisions in family firms around 
the world? 

For other literatures: How do 
different national, regional, and 
international characteristics (e.g. 
demographic, cultural, economic, 
regulatory, legal, institutional, etc.) 
influence political leadership 
succession processes and decisions 
around the world?

Motwani et al. (2006); Tatoglu et al. (2008); Gilding et al. 
(2015); Marshall et al. (2006); Eddleston et al. (2013); Gagnè 
et al. (2011)

Planned/Unplanned Succession 
(Succession Planning)
Number of Articles = 6

How do different external firm 
characteristics (e.g. industry, etc.) 
impact leadership succession 
processes and decisions in 
privately-owned/family firms?

For other literatures: How do 
different external country 
characteristics (e.g. regional/global 
agreements, etc.) impact leadership 
succession processes and decisions 
in political organizations?

Janjuha-Jivraj and Spence (2009); Blumentritt et al. (2012); 
Yan and Sorenson (2006); Jaskiewicz et al. (2015)

Theories Explaining Family 
Business Leadership Succession
Number of Articles = 4

Leadership Succession Theories
Number of Articles = 4

Brun de Pontet et al. (2007); Cadieux (2007)
Succession and Leader 
Characteristics
Number of Articles = 2

Individual Level Consequences:
Leader Attributes: Leader 
Characteristics, Behavior, 
Ownership, Compensation, 

Risk, Performance, &/or 
Legitimacy

Number of Articles = 2

Consequences of 
Leadership Succession 
Number of Articles = 19

Are family CEOs less likely than 
non-family CEOs to depart their 
positions following poor family 
firm performance? If so, what 
governance structures should be 
put in place in family firms to 
reduce favoritism? For other literatures: Do autocrats 

have negative impact on their 
countries? If so, what factors can 
mitigate this impact?

Fan et al. (2012); Molly et al. (2010); Amore et al. (2011)
Succession and Firm 
Characteristics/Risk
Number of Articles = 3

Group/Organization Level 
Attributes: 

Board/TMT/Firm Attributes: 
Board/TMT/Firm 

Characteristics, Behavior, 
Ownership, (Compensation), 

Risk, Performance, Legitimacy, 
&/or Strategic Change

Number of Articles = 17

Pérez-González (2006); Bennedsen et al. (2007); Cucculelli 
and Micucci (2008); Chittoor and Das (2007); Diwisch et al. 
(2009); Cabrera-Suarez (2005); Pan et al. (2018); Fahed-Sreih

Succession and Firm 
Performance/Longevity
Number of Articles = 10

Given that family CEO 
successors negatively influence 
family firm performance, what 
factors can mitigate this 
relationship? Venter et al. (2005); Cater III et al. (2016); Sharma and Irving 

(2005); Sardeshmukh and Corbett (2011)

Successor Characteristics and
Firm Performance
Number of Articles = 4

 and Djoundourian (2006); Carney et al. (2014)  

B
.
Farah,

et
al.

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101289

4



Table 3
Themes of studied research questions and proposed future directions for leadership succession in political organizations (POs).

Articles
First Order or 

Subcategory Themes 
of Research Questions 

Bennister et al. (2015)

Leader Power and 
Succession
Number of Articles = 1

Democratic 
Systems

Number of 
Articles = 19

O'Brien (2015); Greene and Haber (2016); Ennser-Jedenastik 
and Müller (2015); Malamud (2015); Horiuchi et al. (2015); 
Bolleyer and Bytzek (2017)

Democratic Elite 
Bargaining and 
Succession
Number of Articles = 6

Kenig (2008); Kenig (2009); Cross and Blais (2012); Wauters 
(2014); Faucher (2015); Matthews (2016);  Barnea and Rahat 
(2007); Treanor (2010); Baker and FitzPatrick (2010); 
Fleming (2010)

Democratic Rules and 
Succession
Number of Articles = 
10

Lehrer (2012); Somer-Topcu (2017)

Succession and 
Electoral Consequences
Number of Articles = 2

Magaloni (2008); Hale (2005); Hoffmann (2009);  Brownlee 
(2007); Kokkonen and Sundell (2014); Donno (2013); Gabay 
(2014); Maltz (2007); Jones (2011); Blank (2008); Radnitz 
(2012); Herron (2011); Stacher (2008)   

Non-Democratic Elite 
Bargaining and 
Succession
Number of Articles = 
18

Non-
Democratic 

Systems
Number of 

Articles = 27

Gandhi and Przeworski (2007); Frantz and Stein (2017); Zeng 
(2013); Cheeseman (2010); Nalepa and Powell (2016) Non-Democratic 

Institutions and 
Succession
Number of Articles = 5

Goemans (2008); Escribà-Folch (2013); Albertus and 
Menaldo (2014); Tanaka (2016)

Regular/Irregular 
Succession
Number of Articles = 4

Jalalzai and Krook (2010)
Women's Political 
Leadership Worldwide 
and Succession
Number of Articles = 1

Mixed Systems
Number of 
Articles = 7

Marsteintredet and Berntzen (2008); Marsteintredet (2014); 
Baturo (2010) Presidential Systems 

and Succession
Number of Articles = 3

Konrad and Skaperdas (2007); Debs (2016)
Incentive Structures, 
Rents, and Succession
Number of Articles = 2

Konrad and Mui (2017) Succession and 
Incentive Structures and 
Rents
Number of Articles = 1

Important Future Directions 
for POs

Important Future Directions 
for/from other Literatures

How does a leader’s political 
capital explain incumbent 
resiliency?

For other literatures: How does a 
leader’s political capital explain 
incumbent resiliency?

How do the perceptual 
expectations of party followers 
influence leader survival?

For other literatures: How do the 
perceptual expectations of the 
managerial elite with respect to a 
predecessor influence a successor’s 
survival?

How is the “widening” and 
democratization of the selectorate 
influencing the rules and process 
of political succession?

For other literatures: If leadership 
succession faces democratizing 
pressures, how does this influence the 
rules and process of succession?

What is the relationship between 
the kinds of people controlling 
leader selection and the party’s 
responsiveness to voters?

From other literatures: What is the 
relationship between the kinds of 
people controlling executive selection 
and the firm’s responsiveness to 
shareholders and stakeholders?

How do autocrats establish 
credible power-sharing 
commitments? How do 
authoritarian leaders achieve
familial power transfer?

For other literatures: How are outgoing 
leaders best accommodated to transfer 
power peacefully?

How do democratic institutions 
perpetuate (or undermine) 
autocracy?
How influential are international 
bodies in policing political 
violence?

For other literatures: How do 
(democratic) institutions perpetuate (or 
undermine) leader succession?
For other literatures: What sorts of 
international factors influence leader 
succession?

Why and when do certain 
dictators relinquish power while 
others do not?

For other literatures: Why and when do 
certain leaders relinquish power while 
others do not?
From other literatures: Which leaders 
(i.e. with which characteristics) more 
easily relinquish power?

What factors explain the 
feminization of leadership?  How 
does gender influence 
succession?

From other literatures: What factors 
explain the feminization of leadership?  
How does gender influence succession? 
Is there a generational aspect to the 
feminization of succession?

What is the current relationship 
between presidentialism and 
stable succession?

For other literatures: How does the 
formal structure of the firm’s 
leadership influence stability in 
succession?

What sorts of incentives influence 
succession?

For other literatures: What sorts of 
incentives influence succession?

How do individual incentives and 
costs influence the succession 
process?

For other literatures: When is it rational 
for self-interested leaders to manage 
their own succession?

Third Order or 
Overall 

Themes of 
Research 
Questions

Second Order or Category Themes of 
Research Questions

Individual Level Antecedents: Leader 
Attributes

Number of Articles = 1

Group/Organizational Level 
Antecedents: Elite/ 

Party/Parliament/Government 
Attributes

Number of Articles = 6

Environmental Level Antecedents: 
Cultural, Economic, Political, &/or 

Institutional Attributes
Number of Articles = 10

Group/Organizational Level 
Consequences: 

Elite/Party/Parliament/Government 
Attributes

Number of Articles = 2

Group/Organizational Level 
Antecedents: Elite/ 

Party/Parliament/Government 
Attributes

Number of Articles = 18

Environmental Level Antecedents: 
Cultural, Economic, Political, &/or 

Institutional Attributes
Number of Articles = 5

Event, Characteristics, and Theories of 
Leadership Succession 
Number of Articles = 4

Individual Level Antecedents: Leader 
Attributes

Number of Articles = 1

Group/Organizational Level 
Antecedents: Elite/ 

Party/Parliament/Government 
Attributes

Number of Articles = 3

Environmental Level Antecedents: 
Cultural, Economic, Political, &/or 

Institutional Attributes
Number of Articles = 2

Environmental Level Consequences: 
Cultural, Economic, Political, &/or 

Institutional Attributes
Number of Articles = 1

B
.
Farah,

et
al.

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101289

5



Our overarching aim is to contribute to the current state of the field
in the following multidisciplinary (Antonakis, 2017a; Day, 2017) ways.
By using a multidisciplinary approach, firstly, we seek to synthesize the
field of leadership succession to identify critical research gaps and
conceptual and empirical research questions that are ripe for study in
the near future in the business and political science disciplines. Sec-
ondly, we strive to uncover what leadership succession researchers and
practitioners across these disciplines may learn from each other.

Importance and scope of the study

This paper systematically reviews – as per the Tranfield, Denyer,
and Smart (2003) guidelines – the state of the field of leadership suc-
cession in publicly-traded, privately-owned, and political entities; three
literatures that are related but that have evolved fairly separately. Re-
viewing these literatures on leadership succession is important and
necessary for the following reasons: 1) the number of studies on this
phenomenon is growing because of the rise in leadership successions
[CEO turnover rate of the world's 2500 largest companies in 2015 was
16.6%, the highest rate in the past 16 years (PwC, 2016)]; and 2) the
not so effective practice of replacement of leaders (Charan, 2005).
Moreover, this growing literature is addressing new research questions,
examining new individual, group, and organizational/state/country
level succession antecedents and consequences, and is analyzing suc-
cession using new theoretical lenses and research methods due to the
expanding diversity of the backgrounds and perspectives of the re-
searchers studying succession (see Fig. 1 and Tables 1, 2, and 3). Fur-
ther, this body of succession literature is growing in complexity
(Aguilera & Jackson, 2010).

We define leadership succession as the voluntary or involuntary
replacement of the highest ranking person ('t Hart & Uhr, 2011;
Connelly et al., 2016) in a publicly-traded, privately-owned, or political
organization (it consists of two distinct actions, the departure of the
outgoing leader and the selection/appointment of the incoming leader).
A publicly-traded organization (PTO) is a firm that has issued securities
through an initial public offering (IPO) and is traded on at least one
stock exchange or over-the-counter market (i.e. is owned by public
shareholders). Becoming a public firm allows the market to determine
the value of the firm through daily trading (Investopedia, 2016a;
Trostel & Nichols, 1982). A privately-owned/family organization
(POFO) is a firm owned by private investors or family members. Thus, it
does not need to meet the Securities and Exchange Commission's (SEC)
strict filing requirements for public firms in the U.S. Private firms may
issue stock and have shareholders, but their shares do not trade on
public exchanges and are not issued through an IPO. In general, the
shares of these firms are less liquid and their values are difficult to
determine (Investopedia, 2016b; Trostel & Nichols, 1982). Most POFOs
are family businesses, but some are owned by private equity firms. A
political organization (PO) is an institution or entity that is virtually
owned/funded by taxpayers/society, that influences, creates, enforces,
and/or applies laws; mediates conflict; and/or influences/makes po-
licies on the economy and social systems. Examples of political orga-
nizations include presidencies; federal and state governments, legis-
latures, and judiciaries; public bureaucracies, political parties, etc.
(Rhodes, Binder, & Rockman, 2008). Thus, in this review, leadership
succession refers to CEO/president succession in publicly-traded and
privately-owned firms and to presidential, prime ministerial, and party
leader succession, in political entities.

Kesner and Sebora (1994) and Giambatista et al. (2005) reviewed
the CEO succession literature, mainly in publicly-traded organizations,
up to 2005. Handler (1994) and Brockhaus (2004) reviewed the CEO
succession literature, in family businesses (i.e. mainly in privately-
owned organizations), up to 2004. To our knowledge, no comprehen-
sive literature review on leadership succession in political entities exists
yet. Thus, to review the breadth of the above three leadership succes-
sion literatures with enough depth, relevance, currency, and

conciseness such that we can fit our review within the current space
limits, we followed Wowak, Gomez-Mejia, and Steinbach (2017) and
comprehensively reviewed the most recent research (i.e. 2005 - pre-
sent) in these three literatures published in impactful journals, defined
as business and political science journals ranked in the top quartile, Q1,
in Scopus' journal rankings.

To find articles relevant to our review of the three literatures we
first used various combinations of keywords related to leader(ship)
succession and their synonyms, including CEO, president(ial), prime
minister(ial), party, executive, family business, small business, en-
trepreneur, founder, new leader/CEO, etc. succession, transition, turn-
over, replacement, selection, change, transfer, and so on. Then we
searched for relevant backward and forward citations of the articles we
found in our keyword searches. Following Berns and Klarner (2017: 85)
we included articles on leader(ship) succession and excluded articles
marginally related to leader(ship) succession. For example, articles that
were about leader(ship) in general but not about succession in parti-
cular, about phenomena marginally related to leader(ship) succession
but not about the leader(ship) succession phenomenon itself as the
main phenomenon of interest, about executive (i.e. top management
team) succession but not about the top leader's succession, and about
aspects of political leadership elections that are not about political
leader(ship) succession were excluded. Moreover, since the beginning,
in our review of leadership succession in PTOs we included only articles
that used samples of PTOs; in our review of leadership succession in
POFOs we included only articles that used samples of POFOs. To avoid
article duplication and keep the distinction between PTOs and POFOs
clear, articles that explicitly used hybrid samples of PTOs and POFOs
were neither included in our review of PTOs nor included in our review
of POFOs. These articles are included in Appendix A Table A.1. Fur-
thermore, in our review of leadership succession in POs we included
only articles that were about POs (e.g. presidencies; federal and state
governments, legislatures, and judiciaries; political parties, etc.).
However, we did not include articles that were about not-for-profit
organizations (e.g. religious, educational, charitable, scientific, and
literary organizations; civic and social welfare organizations, and local
associations; credit unions; etc.).

Initially, we comprehensively reviewed/summarized about 150 ar-
ticles on leadership succession in PTOs, about 110 in POFOs, and about
100 in POs. That is, we summarized about 360 articles published in
Scopus-indexed journals and coded them based on organization type,
Scopus journal quartile ranking (i.e. Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4), papers'
methodology (empirical quantitative, empirical qualitative, theore-
tical/conceptual, literature review, etc.), data type (when applicable),
statistical analysis type (when applicable), among others. When we
applied the above inclusion/exclusion criteria, the number of articles
included in this review became 177 articles in total (75 on PTOs, 49 on
POFOs, and 53 on POs). We believe this is a more meritorious way to
review the literature, as it includes better quality, more rigorous, and
thus more impactful/useful studies (Antonakis, 2017b).

To organize our review of the three literatures we borrowed from
qualitative research methods, namely the multi-order approach by
Gioia, Corley, and Hamilton (2013). First order or subcategory themes
represent the closest ideas to the articles, second order or category
themes represent the grouping of the first order themes into broader
topics, and third order or overall themes represent the grouping of the
second order themes into bigger umbrella topics (see Tables 1, 2, and
3). In our review of the three literatures and their organizational fra-
meworks (Tables 1, 2, and 3) themes of research questions can be
ranked from most important/researched to least important/researched,
by mostly relying on the number of articles published on this subject.
While some articles may cross the boundaries between first order,
second order, and sometimes even third order themes, we chose to cite/
list articles only under one category, to avoid double counting/double
citing articles. We cited/listed each article under the theme/subtheme
that it was most relevant to and contributed to the most.

B. Farah, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101289

6



Literature review: leadership succession in publicly-traded
organizations

“What a firm becomes can be significantly influenced by how and to
whom this [CEO's] power and authority are passed … This makes CEO
succession a defining event for virtually every organization” (Kesner &
Sebora, 1994: 352; Brackets are added).

Since Kesner and Sebora (1994) recognition of the impact of CEO
succession on the fate of organizations, research on CEO succession has
not slowed down. Research after 2005 has emphasized the antecedents,
consequences, and the CEO succession event/characteristics, albeit
unequally, with more emphasis on antecedents, followed by con-
sequences, and much less on the event and its characteristics.

Antecedents of leadership succession

Leader attributes
Leader (incumbent/successor) characteristics and succession. Since most
researchers studying CEO succession believe leaders matter, it is not
surprising to find many studies examining the relation between CEOs'
characteristics and CEOs' promotion or dismissal. Some of the
characteristics that lead to executives' promotion to, or entrenchment
in, the CEO position include executives' international experience
(Magnusson & Boggs, 2006), experience with more or less diverse
boards prior to appointment (Zhu & Shen, 2016), political
connectedness especially in non-state owned institutions (You & Du,
2012), social capital gained across different business cycles/contexts
(Fitzsimmons & Callan, 2016), and executives' overlapping experience/
education with incumbent CEOs (Wiersema et al., 2018). On the other
hand, CEOs with high or low levels of optimism are more likely to be
forced out of their position than their counterparts with moderate
optimism levels (Campbell et al., 2011).

Leader (incumbent/successor) compensation and succession. Since the
1990s, CEO compensation attracted attention from researchers and
practitioners, especially in the absence of a significant link between
executive compensation and firm performance (Henderson &
Fredrickson, 1996). CEO succession researchers have also studied the
impact of CEO compensation and its structure on CEO dismissal. CEO
overpayment is not a predictor of CEO dismissal, especially that boards
avoid dismissing CEOs, unless CEOs' overpayment is accompanied by
serious underperformance (Wowak et al., 2011). Organizations with
high levels of firm-specific knowledge usually use restricted stocks in
CEO compensation to discourage the departure of CEOs with such
knowledge and encourage them to stay and make long-term
investments (Wang et al., 2017). Building on agency theory, Inderst
and Mueller (2010) theorize that linking CEOs' compensation to firm
performance plays a major role in incentivizing bad CEOs to leave
without severance agreements and in retaining good performing CEOs.
While CEO compensation got much attention in PTOs, it got little
attention in POFOs and POs.

Leader (incumbent/successor) performance and succession. Another
leader-related attribute that is studied in PTOs more than in the other
two types of organizations is leader performance. CEOs who are bad
bidders in cases of acquisitions (Lehn & Zhao, 2006), who file for
financial restatements (Arthaud-Day et al., 2006), or who issue
inaccurate forecasts (Lee et al., 2012) are negatively evaluated by
external analysts (Wiersema & Zhang, 2011) and incur a higher
likelihood of being dismissed from their CEO position.

Board attributes
Board characteristics and succession. Boards of directors are major
players in the governance of PTOs. Boards guard the interests of
shareholders and are therefore the body responsible for monitoring
the performance of CEOs. More recently, they are becoming more active

in the CEO succession process. While, there is still much more to
understand about board members' roles in CEO succession (Berns &
Klarner, 2017), their roles and incentive structures are even less studied
in POFOs and POs. In PTOs, board members who do not actively seek
enough information about external CEO candidates may suffer from
information asymmetry, increasing the likelihood of CEO dismissal
within a shorter period after appointment (Zhang, 2008). Larger
boards, are more likely to dismiss a CEO based on his/her poor
performance (Lau et al., 2009). The boards are attracted to
candidates who are close in age to the board's average age; however,
this attraction disappears if the candidate has a prior poor performance
record (Davidson et al., 2006). Board members' human and social
capital have a positive impact on firm performance following a CEO
succession (Tian et al., 2011). The more external managers serve on a
supervisory board, the higher the likelihood of choosing an external
CEO (Jung, 2014); however, the higher the external experience of the
supervisory board members the higher the likelihood of choosing an
internal CEO (Balsmeier et al., 2013). In addition to the board
composition, Haleblian and Rajagopalan (2006) argue that the
board's perception and attributions of the CEO's performance and
efficacy affect their decision to dismiss the CEO.

Board compensation/performance and succession. In addition to boards'
active roles in monitoring sitting CEOs, the structure of their incentives,
that is increasing the equity-based share in boards' incentives, increases
boards' proactiveness in dismissing potentially poor performing CEOs
(Ertugrul & Krishnan, 2011). Citrin and Ogden (2010) find that board
members should not be excluded when looking for a new CEO,
especially given the combination of their inside knowledge of the
organization and their outside perspective on operations.

Firm attributes
Firm characteristics/risk/performance and succession. While leaders' and
boards' characteristics affect decisions related to CEO retention or
dismissal, the idiosyncratic characteristics of the firm or the context of
CEO succession also affect these decisions. Firms, namely in the Chinese
context, rely on accounting performance measures rather than market
or stock prices to decide on the performance of the firm, and on
whether to retain or dismiss the CEO (Conyon & He, 2014). Some firms
are more tempted to force CEOs out than others, including firms with
agency and information asymmetry problems (Hornstein, 2013), with
control-oriented cultures (Fiordelisi & Ricci, 2014), and with high
idiosyncratic or firm-specific risks (Bushman et al., 2010). Other
companies experience less forced CEO turnover, including companies
that are diversified (Berry et al., 2006), and companies which value
firm-specific human capital such as service industries (Mobbs & Raheja,
2012). The organization chart of a firm plays a role in CEO dismissal
under low performance conditions. The presence of a separate COO or
president position increases the chances of CEO dismissal when the firm
is performing poorly (Zhang, 2006). Hence the presence of a fall back
personality, may increase the chances of dismissing the leader of a
poorly performing institution.

Environmental level antecedents: cultural, economic, political, &/or
institutional attributes
Cultural and institutional attributes and succession. Some factors outside
the locus of control of the organization affect CEO succession and the
performance of the organization. Such factors include 1) industry and
market conditions (Eisfeldt & Kuhnen, 2013; Jenter & Kanaan, 2015)
and 2) country-level characteristics such as the degree of managerial
discretion and development of CEO labor markets (Crossland & Chen,
2013), the structure of institutional shareholders (Chen, Li, Su, & Yao,
2012), or shifts in the dominant institutional logic such as the rise in
institutional ownership, in board involvement, or shareholder activism
(Helwege et al., 2012). Banks also play monitoring roles and force
poorly performing companies to undertake CEO turnover (Marshall

B. Farah, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101289

7



et al., 2014; Ozelge & Saunders, 2012).

Event, characteristics, and theories of leadership succession

Studying the antecedents and consequences of CEO succession gets
more attention than studying the leadership succession event/process
and its characteristics.

Leadership succession event
Leader change. Though, it has been established in the literature that
leader change negatively affects firm performance, this negative
relationship is more prevalent when the change in leader is
accompanied by a change in leader gender be it female to male or
vice versa (Zhang & Qu, 2016). Changing the leader in certain firms is
forced, however, leaders who are politically connected and have
structural and tenure power have a higher ability to avoid forced
replacement (Pi & Lowe, 2011), despite poor performance.
Nevertheless, the presence of inside directors with externally
appreciated talents, may force the current CEO out of his/her
position. The main reason being these directors are able to serve
immediately as insider CEO replacements or else the company risks
losing them to competitors due to their needed talents (Mobbs, 2013). It
is intriguing that this topic has been barely studied in POFOs and POs.

Leadership succession characteristics
Internal/external succession. The difference between internal and/or
external successors has been extensively studied in leader succession
in publicly-traded organizations. For example, what affects the board's
decision to select an insider versus an outsider? Tsoulouhas et al.
(2007) argue that boards should select insiders versus outsiders based
on superior capabilities. Insiders are preferred to outsiders only if they
have equal or better skills than outsiders, otherwise outsiders are
preferred. However, Boyer and Ortiz-Molina (2008) show empirically
that boards may make their decisions based on stock ownership.
Executives with more stock ownership are more likely to be
promoted to the CEO position; however, if inside executives do not
own enough stocks, the board tends to hire an outsider CEO. When
incoming CEOs have a greater bargaining power they are more likely to
have duality (i.e. appointed CEO and board chair simultaneously),
especially when outgoing CEOs are fired, or were externally hired, or
insiders promoted from the COO or president positions (Davidson et al.,
2008). Investors' perceptions of inside successors and outside successors
depends on the reason for CEO succession. Following an integrity or
competence failure, investors' have a better perception of the firm if the
successor is an outsider (Connelly et al., 2016). Outside successors
perform well when they resemble the incumbent CEO socio-
demographically and have prior successful experience (Georgakakis &
Ruigrok, 2017), or when the firm has been performing poorly under the
previous CEO (Karaevli & Zajac, 2012).

Planned/unplanned succession. The use of interim CEOs has gained
traction in practice (Ballinger & Marcel, 2010) and in CEO succession
research is an interesting event especially in the case of unplanned exit
of incumbents. Liang et al. (2012) propose a theoretical framework
arguing about who is more likely to be an interim CEO and under which
conditions. They argue interim CEOs who perform well in the transition
period enjoy longer interim tenure and are more likely to get promoted
to CEO. Using an interim CEO hurts firm performance unless the
interim CEO serves simultaneously as the chairperson (Ballinger &
Marcel, 2010), and boards usually choose to appoint interim leaders
when the sitting CEO got fired and there is no known successor
(Mooney et al., 2017). Interim CEOs are more likely to use earnings
management (i.e. present overly positive financial reports) to boost firm
performance especially in the absence of effective governance
mechanisms (Chen et al., 2015).

Consequences of leadership succession

Leader attributes
Succession and leader behavior/compensation. Leaders' attributes have
been studied more as antecedents rather than as consequences of
succession. Though we believe that such an event can have an impact
on the leader and that this impact might affect the way the leader
conducts himself/herself during CEO tenure. CEOs, more so outside
CEOs, increase discretionary spending during their first year of tenure
even if the firm's risk exposure is high (Bornemann et al., 2015). Boards
need to be attentive to the severance agreement offered to CEOs
stepping down voluntarily as markets react negatively when these
CEOs receive high payments (Yermack, 2006).

Board attributes
Succession and board behavior. Similar to leaders' attributes, boards'
attributes have also been more studied pre rather than post succession.
Boards increase their monitoring activities of the newly appointed CEO
the first year and then their monitoring intensity decreases, hence
sometimes justifying the weak link between poor performance and CEO
turnover (Dikolli et al., 2014).

Firm attributes
Succession and firm characteristics. Unlike leaders' and boards'
attributes, the impact of CEO succession on firm attributes, namely
performance, has garnered a significant amount of research. Cao et al.
(2006) argue CEO turnover negatively affects exploration and
exploitation capabilities of the firm, unless the successor is at least as
embedded as the predecessor in the firm's intrafirm and interfirm social
networks, making the successor's choice an important task to minimize
the effect of CEO turnover on firm capabilities.

Succession and firm performance. Firm performance captured the lion's
share of CEO succession, it has served as the dependent variable in
multiple studies. Earlier than 2005, the impact of the origin of the
successor, insider versus outsider, on post succession firm performance
has been extensively studied (Giambatista et al., 2005). CEO succession
negatively impacts performance and increases the volatility of a firm's
stock price (Clayton et al., 2005). Karaevli (2007) finds that the impact
of CEO origin on firm performance is moderated by environmental
munificence, prior firm performance, and changes in the top
management team members. In their meta-analysis, Schepker et al.
(2017) find that 1) CEO succession negatively impacts short-term firm
performance but has no significant direct impact on long-term
performance, 2) CEO origin plays a role in mediating the relationship
between CEO succession and long-term performance, and 3) Inside
CEOs do not engage in drastic strategic change but they improve long-
term firm performance.

Having a succession plan in place reduces the negative impact of
CEO succession on firm performance (Behn et al., 2005). Performance
of firms with a majority controlling shareholder improves significantly
after the replacement of the CEO (Kato & Long, 2006). Since the ma-
jority shareholder is actively involved in monitoring the performance of
the CEO to save its own interests in the firm. Also, a firm's performance
is contingent on the sensemaking and sensegiving cues released to the
public post CEO replacement (Bilgili et al., 2017; Quigley et al., 2017),
hence firm narratives play a major role in post succession performance.

Hiring previous CEOs is negatively linked to post succession firm
performance (Hamori & Koyuncu, 2015); so is hiring successors with
different power levels than the predecessor (Ting, 2013). However,
prior experience as CEO with turnaround capabilities and the degree of
fit of the successor to the succession's contextual conditions at hand
positively affect post succession firm performance (Chen & Hambrick,
2012; Gomulya & Boeker, 2014). CEO succession affects different sta-
keholders differently. For example, generally bondholders' value de-
creases while stockholders' value increases post CEO succession (Adams

B. Farah, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101289

8



& Mansi, 2009). Therefore when looking at the impact of CEO succes-
sion on firm performance one should pay attention to different stake-
holders rather than all stakeholders together. Also governing bodies
need to pay attention to the characteristics of the successor, because
insiders and outsiders access different kinds of resources (Chung & Luo,
2013). Recently, researchers have been investigating the impact of CEO
succession not only on financial and market performance but also on
corporate sustainability performance. Bernard et al. (2016) use upper
echelon and agency theories to show that CEO turnover has a positive
impact on a firm's corporate social performance. This positive impact is
higher when the CEO is recruited from outside the firm.

Succession and strategic change. The ability of successors to induce
strategic change has also drawn the attention of strategy and
organization scholars. Some researchers believe that the ability of
inside successors to induce strategic change after they become CEOs is
usually limited because they are trained by previous CEOs (Bigley &
Wiersema, 2002), while others show that outsiders are more likely to
induce strategic change including the degree of firm
internationalization (Lin & Liu, 2012). Thus, the origin of the CEO
affects the strategic change undertaken post succession. Inside CEOs
usually are more interested in achieving a greater scale of divestiture
whereas outside CEOs are interested in increasing the scope of change
through divestiture (Chiu et al., 2016). Karaevli and Zajac (2013)
hypothesize the nature of the succession, the predecessor's tenure, and
prior firm performance moderates the impact of outside CEOs on
strategic change. These authors show that if succession is not forced
or pre-succession firm performance increases, the outside origin of the
new CEO is positively associated with post-succession strategic change;
however, the moderating effect of the predecessor's tenure is not
significant. Despite this debate, in a recent study, Elosge et al. (2018)
do not find support to most of their hypotheses regarding the impact of
insider or outsider origin of the CEO and its impact on strategic change
measured through the firm's degree of internationalization.

Literature review: leadership succession in privately-owned
(mostly family) businesses

“Family firms combine all the tensions of family life with all the strains of
business life, and at no moment do both sorts of stress combine so forcefully
as at that of generational change” (The Economist, 2004: 69).

Our literature review of leadership succession in privately-owned/
family organizations revealed that most POFOs were family firms and
almost all research on leadership succession in POFOs concerned family
businesses. Thus, we will use the terms “POFOs” and “family busi-
nesses/firms” interchangeably hereafter.

Although we found more recent impactful studies on leadership
succession in PTOs than POFOs (75 studies versus 49 studies respec-
tively), leadership succession in POFOs may be more crucial to the
survival and continuity of these organizations than to their publicly-
traded counterparts. We argue this since fewer than 30% of family
businesses are passed on to the second generation whereas only 10%
make it to the third generation (Lansberg, 1999). Thus, in this section
we review the literature on the essential topic of leadership succession
in privately-owned/family businesses (i.e., what we know). To review
this literature, we organize it into three overall themes and their re-
spective category and subcategory themes that emerged during our
review (as presented in the columns of Table 2).

Antecedents of leadership succession

Leader attributes
Successor characteristics and succession. Salvato et al. (2012) found that
the selection of CEOs and their career patterns in family firms were
driven more by the managerial skills they developed over their careers
than by family-related issues, suggesting managerial proficiency

overcame nepotism in family firm CEO selections. Dalpiaz et al.
(2014) developed a framework for understanding family business
succession narratives and presented a typology of some of the
narrative strategies (constructing a sense of family, family eulogizing,
and highlighting non-family endorsement) that successors may use to
legitimize their successions. DeNoble et al. (2007) pinpointed key social
capital [e.g. family relationships with 1) incumbent CEO, 2) family
members involved in the family owned business (FOB), and 3) family
members not involved in the FOB; external and internal business
relationships] and human capital [e.g. tacit firm-specific knowledge,
industry knowledge, and general business knowledge] dimensions that
could be utilized to develop a family business self-efficacy scale that could
be used to identify and/or develop potential successful family
successors.

Successors' gender and succession. Gender and succession has been
limitedly studied in all three literatures. Given that in family firms,
passing the baton to women family members is becoming more
common, this topic has been somewhat more studied in POFOs than
PTOs and POs. Vera and Dean (2005) found daughter successors in
family firms faced challenges such as employee rivalry, work-life
balance, and greater uncertainty about whether they would one day
be the successor. They also found daughters experienced more
difficulties succeeding their mothers than succeeding their fathers.
Haberman and Danes (2007) found women in father-son firms suffered
from feelings of exclusion and instances of higher disagreement among
family members, which created less shared meaning, and lower levels
of integration among family members. Women in father-daughter firms
enjoyed feelings of inclusion, resulting in lower disagreement that
produced higher levels of shared meaning, collaboration, and
integration among family members.

Firm attributes
Firm performance and succession. Although organizational performance
and succession has been well studied in both PTOs and POFOs, it has
been limitedly studied in POs. Hillier and McColgan (2009) found that
family CEOs were less likely than non-family CEOs to depart their
positions following poor performance, due to weak internal governance
systems in family firms. However, André (2009) criticized Hillier and
McColgan's (2009) work and suggested it had a number of issues –
related to performance measurement, sample selection, firm size and
age, industry, etc. – that required further examination. Tsai et al. (2009)
found a negative relationship between diversification level and CEO
turnover in family firms, which they attributed to family CEOs
entrenching themselves in their family firms.

Event, characteristics, and theories of leadership succession

Leadership succession characteristics
Intra-family succession (IFS) and extra-family succession (EFS). This topic
has been extensively studied in POFOs. Internal versus external
successions have also been fairly well studied in PTOs. However,
similar topics (e.g. presidential, prime ministerial, etc. successions
from within the same party versus from other parties) have not been
studied in POs. Almost all articles in this category discussed either intra-
family succession (IFS) alone or IFS versus extra-family succession
(EFS). For instance, among the studies that discussed IFS, De Massis
et al. (2016) showed that incumbents' attitudes towards IFSs are
influenced by both situational (number of children and number of
family shareholders) and individual (emotional attachment to the
business) antecedents as well as by their interactions. Moreover,
Lambrecht (2005) showed that IFS is a lifelong, continuous process,
in which the family must cultivate the soft elements of the succession
process (i.e., entrepreneurship, freedom, values, outside experience,
upbringing, education, etc.). Further, a family business can develop into
a family dynasty only when it embraces sound governance as a

B. Farah, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101289

9



fundamental principle (i.e., the individual family member belongs to
the family, which belongs to the business). In addition, Lam (2011)
highlighted the inconsistencies between the expressed attitudes,
perceptions, plans, and actual behaviors of family firm members
during the succession process and attributed these inconsistencies to
the multi-entity roles family firm members simultaneously play during
this interactive, dynamic social process. Furthermore, McMullen and
Warnick (2015) theoretically argued that the more a parent-founder
promotes affective commitment to the family business in a child-
successor, by supporting his/her psychological needs for competence,
autonomy, and relatedness within the family business, the greater the
likelihood the child-successor will continue to engage in family business
activities. Conversely, De Massis et al. (2008) analyzed the literature on
family business succession and presented a long list of individual,
relational, financial, contextual, and process factors that prevent IFS
from occurring. Salvato and Corbetta (2013) analyzed the detailed
descriptions of four advisor-directed leadership development processes
in generational family businesses. They found that, by taking on a
transitional leadership role shared with the incumbent and the
successor, advisors can play a key role in facilitating the construction
of successors' leadership.

Among the studies that discussed IFS versus EFS, Royer et al. (2008)
found that specific (tacit) knowledge characteristics (e.g., relevant ex-
periential family business-specific knowledge and relevant general and
technical industry-specific knowledge) combined with a favorable
transaction atmosphere, made IFS preferable over EFS. Furthermore,
Jaskiewicz et al. (2016) identified four approaches (interwoven, se-
lective, commercial, and detached) of managing potentially conflicting
family and commercial logics that are related to four succession pro-
cesses (combinations of family culture, leadership style, family con-
tinuity, and family unity) and that lead to IFS or EFS. In addition, Liu
et al. (2015) found that even when a leader can overcome individual
decision biases, a sampling bias resulting from families' strong ties can
still allow a leader to wrongly conclude that IFS is better than EFS when
the opposite is true (a form of nepotism).

Planned/unplanned succession (succession planning). This subcategory
included several articles that discussed CEO succession planning.
Motwani et al. (2006) found that 1) firms with less than US$1m in
revenues placed a higher priority on selecting a successor with strong
sales/marketing skills, presumably to achieve business growth and 2) it
was important for all SMEs to develop a formal succession plan,
communicate their successor's identity, and provide training/
mentoring to the incumbent CEO. Tatoglu et al. (2008) found
predecessors' perceptions about the extent of succession planning was
related to their desire to relinquish power. Gilding et al. (2015),
suggested that the family firm succession planning literature assumes
incumbents have two main motives: family firm continuity and family
harmony. By cross-tabulating these motives they produced a typology
of four distinct combinations of motives for succession planning. They
then argued these combinations of motives suggest four succession
planning outcomes: institutionalization, implosion, imposition, and
individualization.

Marshall et al. (2006) found that 1) older owner age was, para-
doxically, directly related to formal succession plans and indirectly
related to behavioral practices that interfere with succession planning
and 2) both autocratic and relational leadership are positively asso-
ciated with the importance of succession planning. Eddleston et al.
(2013) found that the extent to which strategic planning and succession
planning are related to family firm growth depends on the generation
managing the firm. Both forms of planning positively affect first-gen-
eration, but not second-generation, firms' growth; succession planning
and strategic planning respectively positively and negatively affect
third-and-beyond generation firms' growth. Gagnè et al. (2011) studied
the effects of the goal adjustment capacities (goal disengagement and
goal reengagement) of family business leaders nearing retirement age

on their retirement planning. They found that leaders with high goal
reengagement capacities who trusted their successor's abilities set an
earlier retirement date than others and that leaders with poor goal
disengagement capacities who did not trust their successor were unable
to improve their retirement expectations over time.

Leadership succession theories
Theories explaining family business leadership succession. Theory papers
attempting to broadly explain the leadership succession phenomenon in
general were found for POFOs but not for PTOs or POs. This category
included mostly theory papers attempting to explain family firm
succession or transgenerational entrepreneurship. Janjuha-Jivraj and
Spence (2009) proposed a new development of reciprocity theory called
Bounded Intergenerational Reciprocity and used it as a framework to
explain the dynamics of intergenerational family firm succession.
Blumentritt et al. (2012) introduced game theory as a model for
analyzing family firm succession. They defined game theory as a set
of rational but interdependent choices made by individuals about
leadership. Yan and Sorenson (2006) conceptually examined
Confucian values and their effect on family firm succession.
Jaskiewicz et al. (2015) built a new theory, based on what they
called Entrepreneurial Legacy, to explain how exceptional firms
achieve transgenerational entrepreneurship.

Consequences of leadership succession

Leader attributes
Succession and leader characteristics. Brun de Pontet et al. (2007) found
that although control stayed largely with incumbents in family firms
approaching succession, indicators of succession readiness were more
related to successors' levels of control. Cadieux (2007) presented a
typology of predecessor roles during and after instatement of the
successor and found that predecessors played teaching, protector,
introducer, mobilizer, intermediary, and confidante roles during this
period.

Firm attributes
Succession and firm characteristics/risk. Fan et al. (2012) found that
privately-owned firms move from an insider- to a more outsider- based
accounting system around a succession, due to predecessors'
personalized assets (e.g. social/political networks), that facilitated
relationship contracting, but that are nontransferable to successors.
Additionally, Molly et al. (2010) found that first generation family CEO
successions negatively impacted family firms' debt rates and growth
rates but did not impact their profitability; however, later generation
family CEO successions positively impacted family firms' debt rates but
did not impact their growth rates or profitability. Amore et al. (2011)
found that the appointment of non-family professional CEOs
significantly increased the use of debt.

Succession and firm performance/longevity. Succession and
organizational performance has been extensively studied in PTOs and
POFOs, however it has been barely studied, if at all, in POs. This
category in the research on POFOs included several articles discussing
the relation between succession and different measures of firm
performance. Pérez-González (2006), Bennedsen et al. (2007), and
Cucculelli and Micucci (2008) found that family CEO successions, as
compared to non-family professional CEO successions, had a negative
impact on family firm performance. Chittoor and Das (2007) found that
non-family CEO successions (commonly referred to as
professionalization of management), compared to family CEO
successions, had a positive impact on family firm performance.

Diwisch et al. (2009) did not find a relation between planned (fu-
ture) successions [versus no planned (future) successions] and family
firm growth, but found a positive relation between (past) successions
and family firm growth. Cabrera-Suarez (2005) found that the quality

B. Farah, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101289

10



of interpersonal relationships, successors' expectations, and the role of
the predecessor differentiated between more and less successful suc-
cession processes. Pan et al. (2018) found that family firms used more
corporate philanthropy in connection to family (as compared to non-
family) CEO successions, especially when the succession was a first
generation CEO succession, suggesting it reduces the magnitude of poor
performance after family CEO successions.

Two articles studied the determinants of family firm longevity. The
first found older firms 1) used participatory decision-making, 2) held
family meetings, and 3) had formal redemption and liquidity plans
(Fahed-Sreih & Djoundourian, 2006). The second analyzed and dis-
cussed in some detail the differential effects of inheritance law provi-
sions on family firm succession and longevity in Germany, France,
Hong Kong, and the United States (Carney et al., 2014).

Successor characteristics and firm performance. In this category, Venter
et al. (2005) found that the willingness of the successor to take over,
and the relationship between the owner-manager and successor
positively influenced both the satisfaction with the succession process
and the continued profitability of the family firm. They also found that
the preparation level of the successor positively impacted only the
continued profitability of the family firm. Cater III et al. (2016) found
the dynamics of successor teams may lead, either to a positive
outcome/track resulting in team commitment and thus the continuity
of the family firm, or to a negative outcome/track leading to the
dissolution of the team and potentially the family firm. Sharma and
Irving (2005) theoretically proposed four bases of successor
commitment to family firms – affective, normative, calculative, and
imperative – and argued that these different bases of commitment lead
to varying levels of discretionary behaviors and thus of family firm
performance. Sardeshmukh and Corbett (2011) found that successors
who balance and combine their family firm-specific human capital,
built through experience within the family firm, with general human
capital, built through education and work experience outside the family
firm, better perceive entrepreneurial opportunities.

Literature review: leadership succession in political organizations

“The king is dead, long live the king.” (Anonymous)
In the field of political science, much attention is paid to how in-

cumbent politicians hold on to power and, when necessary, how they
are replaced. This interest certainly is merited, for as Bueno de
Mesquita and Smith (2017: 708) note, “Political succession, or rather its
avoidance, is at the heart of the decisions leaders make.” To focus this
inquiry we use Bynander and t Hart's (2006) approach. Bynander and t
Hart (2006) view leader succession in politics as change in the occu-
pation of senior positions within political parties in or out of govern-
ment, the most conspicuous and consequential of which are those of
heads of government and party leaders. Because change in senior po-
litical positions often accompanies (or necessitates) a change in the
entire personnel exercising the powers of government owing to pre-
dictable political events such as elections (or unpredictable events like
revolutions), there is a slippery definitional “slope” with which analysts
must contend. Are all democratic elections really about succession? In
one sense, they are, as every vote carries with it the chance to reaffirm
the existing leader, or choose a new one. Yet democratic elections ac-
complish several discrete functions, such as determining public opinion
on policy issues, recruiting new representatives, mobilizing followers,
collecting financial resources, and so on. In analyzing such complexity,
scholars focus on a variety of salient factors and questions, and so a
relatively large literature on elections is published annually. For our
purposes, only studies of elections as they pertain directly to succession
– defined as change in the head of government or party leader office –
are salient to this study.

Normally, democratic and non-democratic systems are dis-
tinguished when analyzing political phenomena across nation states,

owing to democracy's large effect on key processes. There are several
different approaches to discern the level of democracy. A widely used
and reliable method to determine a system's democratic status is to
consult Freedom House's “Country Scores” ranking (Freedom House,
2018), which distinguishes free countries from those that are partly free
and not free. We use this method here to refine our study of succession
in the political sphere.

While this analysis compares the business and political science lit-
eratures on leadership succession, it's worth noting the two spheres are
distinct in several respects. Modern democratic voting processes have
few obvious analogs in the business world. For example, among pub-
licly-traded firms it is difficult to locate organizations where all the
employees regularly cast an equal vote to decide upon a new CEO (or
retain the existing leader) as citizens do in elections.

Our search for recent impactful journal articles on leadership suc-
cession returned 77 results published in political science. The initial
data collection was reviewed carefully, and some articles whose content
did not reflect our inquiry were removed. A total of 53 articles met the
criteria for analysis. These articles were allocated among three cate-
gories that reflected whether each concerned a system that was fully
democratic (19 articles), not fully democratic (27 articles), or that re-
ferenced both types (which is termed “mixed systems”) (seven articles).
To refine our understanding of each study's main goal, we induced sub-
categories based on each article's core research question(s). The main
categories and sub-categories help to organize our inquiry. Their spe-
cific contents are discussed in more detail below, and are summarized
in Table 3.

Democratic systems

Individual level antecedents: leader attributes
Leader power and succession. One of the three thematic categories
comprises studies of democratic systems. Of the 53 research papers
under scrutiny here, nineteen of these are about leadership succession
within democratic systems. Within this theme, a first sub-category of
analysis concerns leader power and succession. The study of power lies
at the heart of political science, so it is a little surprising that only one of
the nineteen democratic succession articles directly focuses on this
subject. Bennister et al. (2015) conceived of leaders' political authority
as a kind of capital. They present a Leadership Capital Index (LCI) that
can be used to track and compare the fortunes of political leaders.
Exploring its utility in analyzing incumbent resiliency in the specific
case of former British Prime Minister Tony Blair, the authors concluded
“the LCI has the potential to provide a rich, nuanced, comparative and
diachronic analysis of political leadership” owing to its focus on
relational linkages to supporters and allies (Bennister et al., 2015: 435).

Group/organizational level antecedents: elite/party/parliament/government
attributes
Democratic elite bargaining and succession. Another sub-category of
studies examines how elite relationships, perceptions, shared
preferences, and exchanges within party structures influence who is
chosen, and how they are chosen, to lead. This group of studies includes
six analyses by O'Brien (2015); Greene and Haber (2016); Ennser-
Jedenastik and Müller (2015); Malamud (2015); Horiuchi et al. (2015);
and Bolleyer and Bytzek (2017). Scholars here aimed to move beyond
institutional settings of leadership selection or situational influences
such as economic conditions to explain succession. Horiuchi et al.
(2015), for example, proposed a perceptual theory of leadership
survival that focuses on the expectations of party constituents who
have the power to remove leaders. They surmised that because
constituents remember political stances and recall efficacy, some
predecessors are much ‘harder acts to follow’ than others.
Consequently, they show that these perceptions explain differential
leader survival rates regardless of the extant rules concerning leader
removal and replacement. O'Brien (2015) showed gendered political

B. Farah, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101289

11



opportunity structures are shaped by parties' political performance.
Namely, women are more likely to retain office when parties gain seats,
but more likely to lose office when performance begins to erode.

In a similar vein, Greene and Haber (2016) developed and tested a
theory of intraparty preferences and leader selection predicated on the
hypothesis that a party's electoral context influences its preference di-
versity. Sensitive to perceptions of environmental conditions like health
of the economy, they showed intraparty heterogeneity likely influences
the amount of “cohesion between the party's leaders and their ability to
negotiate with potential coalition partners or on policy agreements
(Greene & Haber, 2016: 629).” Ennser-Jedenastik and Müller (2015)
claimed that organizational and behavioral characteristics of the lea-
dership selection and removal process impact the odds of party leader
change. Exploring their hypotheses in a study of Austrian parties, they
found electoral success and institutional intra-party factors to be the
most significant determinants of party leader survival. Malamud (2015)
proposed that the Argentine collapse of 2001 featuring the resignation
of two presidents was in fact heavily guided by an identifiable set of
sub-national executives – mainly Peronist party mayors and governors –
whose resiliency ensured an unappreciated continuity in that period's
apparently chaotic politics. Finally, Bolleyer and Bytzek (2017) showed
that party organizational characteristics (i.e. party origin, time for party
building, and leadership continuity) influenced party capacity to sus-
tain electoral support after breakthrough.

Environmental level antecedents: cultural, economic, political, &/or
institutional attributes
Democratic rules and succession. Of the nineteen studies of succession in
democratic systems, the largest category of attention concerned
“Democratic Rules and Succession.” Institutional analysis is a
traditional method of examining leadership processes, focusing on the
formal and informal rules of selection. Our collection reflects this
approach. One well-established approach to studying political
succession is to focus on who chooses the leader, a group of
individuals known as the selectorate. In our collection analysts such
as Kenig (2008, 2009), Cross and Blais (2012), Wauters (2014), Faucher
(2015), and Matthews (2016) study the democratization of leadership
selection rules, particularly concerning the “widening” of the
selectorate to include grass-roots members in what some define as a
“participatory revolution” (Punnett, 1993 as quoted in Matthews, 2016:
905). Of these the most impactful assessments are found by Kenig
(2009) who offered a more complex method of classifying key aspects
of leadership selection, and who in another study found wider
selectorates do produce a wider field of contestants, albeit along with
less competitive contests (Kenig, 2008). Adopting a slightly different
tack by examining candidate selection rules at multiple levels of
politics, Barnea and Rahat (2007) showed that the frequency of
reform in candidate selection methods increases when external and
internal environments are more competitive.

A longstanding method of studying succession rules in politics is to
focus on legal and constitutional rules overarching leader selection.
Authors of three papers adopt this method to probe the constitutional
and legal adequacy of American executive succession procedures in the
context of a 2010 Fordham Law School symposium. Treanor's in-
troductory essay noted the rules governing succession have evolved
considerably over the last two centuries. However, there are still a
number of critical gaps in the law, and the “potential for disaster re-
mains real (Treanor, 2010: 779).” Baker and FitzPatrick (2010) then
reviewed several problematic scenarios concerning executive succes-
sion drawn from political drama and presidential history to underscore
that power transfer should be seamless when the American president is
incapacitated or absent. Analyzing the Presidential Succession Act of
1947, Fleming (2010) suggested three minor changes to it that would
ensure succession protocols access persons with considerable executive
experience while ensuring the principle of legislative succession re-
mains intact.

Group/organizational level consequences: elite/party/parliament/
government attributes
Succession and electoral consequences. In the final sub-category of
democratic studies, a couple of scholars consider how leadership
change may influence voters. Lehrer (2012) investigated the
relationship between the kinds of people who control party
leadership selection and the party's responsiveness to voters. He finds
that intra-party institutions (inclusiveness versus exclusiveness) are
decisive with respect to which groups the party (dis)enfranchises in the
leadership selection (i.e. their mean supporters' or the median voters'
position). In a similar vein, Somer-Topcu (2017), using data from seven
Western European democracies, showed that leadership change
reduced voter disagreement about party policy positions.

Non-democratic systems

Group/organizational level antecedents: elite/party/parliament/government
attributes
Non-democratic elite bargaining and succession. Our search located 27
articles concerning political succession in non-democratic systems. It
may seem unusual that there is more attention to non-democratic
systems than democratic ones. However, because elite control is at the
heart of non-democratic governance, and because effecting a peaceful
transfer of power in autocracies is often difficult, the weight of analysis
in this field tends to focus heavily on how small, highly privileged
ruling groups retain power. The topics of democratic and non-
democratic elite bargaining and succession have been extensively
studied in POs. However, their counterparts, e.g. board and TMT
negotiations and succession, have been rarely studied in PTOs and
POFOs, probably because these negotiations happen privately behind
closed doors.

In view of the above, a large category of articles concerns the me-
chanics and dynamics of inter-elite bargaining and succession. Among
these are Magaloni's (2008) widely-cited study of credible power
sharing arrangements under autocracy, Hale's (2005) analysis of elite
collective action and regime cycles, and Hoffmann's (2009) study of
Cuba's post-Fidel Castro succession. Within this theme a few scholars
focus on familial power transfer, such as Brownlee's (2007) study of
hereditary succession in modern autocracies, and Kokkonen and
Sundell's (2014) treatment of the virtues of primogeniture, that is, the
right of succession belonging to first-born children, mostly first-born
sons, in ensuring autocratic stability.

Some analysts studied elite bargaining and succession events in light
of progress towards democratization. Donno (2013), for example, found
that the effect of internal and international pressure on democratization
is contingent on the type of authoritarian regime (competitive versus
hegemonic) and that the greater susceptibility to pressure explains why
competitive authoritarian elections are more likely to lead to democ-
racy. With a similar view towards explaining the effect of civil society
along with external Western elites on Joyce Banda's rise to power in
Malawi, Gabay (2014) underscored domestic and global political
economy as key drivers in Malawi's postcolonial era.

As well, we located several case studies of inter-elite bargaining
concerning succession in countries such as Iran, Russia, and Azerbaijan.
Thoughtfully evaluating several scenarios concerning the exit of
Ayatollah Khamenei, Jones (2011: 120–121) concluded that “the suc-
cession process...will be a high-stakes and brutal showdown condi-
tioned more by the politics of the moment than by the provisions of the
constitution.” Blank (2008) similarly investigated succession in post-
Soviet Russia from the perspective of Tsarist patrimony, concluding the
state's foundations are inherently unstable. With respect to Azerbaijan,
Radnitz (2012) traced the efforts of President Heydar Aliyev in mana-
ging internal conflict and passing the post to his son, concluding that
scholars of post-Soviet politics err when they take the unitary state for
granted. Herron (2011) and Stacher (2008) examined authoritarian
elections to uncover how they ensure a ruling regime's dominance and

B. Farah, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101289

12



pre-empt opposition challenges.

Environmental level antecedents: cultural, economic, political, &/or
institutional attributes
Non-democratic institutions and succession. The effects of democratic and
non-democratic external factors (e.g. rules, institutions, etc.) on
succession have been extensively studied in POs. The impact of such
external factors on succession has also been fairly well studied in PTOs
but not POFOs. In examining how scholars are studying leadership
succession in non-democratic systems, we discerned another category
of articles sharing an institutional focus. In an important analysis,
Gandhi and Przeworski (2007) found authoritarian rulers rely on
nominally democratic institutions for political survival when they
need to solicit the cooperation of outsiders or deter the threat of
rebellion. Similarly, Frantz and Stein (2017) found that succession
rules, like other pseudo-democratic institutions, provide survival
benefits for dictators because they reduce the incentives supporting a

coup, or a forceful grab for power. Zeng (2013) found that
institutionalized party rules that have developed over a long period
are key to understanding what matters most in the selection of China's
leaders. Cheeseman (2010) argued open-seat polls (i.e. where no
incumbent vies for election) are especially likely to produce
opposition victories in sub-Saharan Africa, and so work towards
democratic progress. Finally, Nalepa and Powell (2016) found that
under a weak International Criminal Court (ICC) regime, the more the
opposition had engaged in criminal forms of dissidence, the more likely
was the dictator to peacefully relinquish power. If the ICC is strong, the
degree of the opposition's engagement in criminal forms of dissidence
mostly has no effect on the dictator's likelihood of exiting.

Event, characteristics, and theories of leadership succession
Regular and irregular succession. Observing that non-democratic
successions often hinge on the fates of outgoing dictators (e.g.
resignation, retirement, natural death, exile, imprisonment,

Table 4
Number of studies published in each theme/category in publicly-traded, privately-owned, & political organizations.

Category Number of studies published in
publicly-traded organizations
literature

Number of studies published in
privately-owned/family
organizations literature

Number of studies published in
political organizations
literature

Antecedents of leadership succession
Individual
Leader attributes: Leader (incumbent/successor) characteristics,
behavior, ownership, compensation, risk, performance, &/or
legitimacy

13 5 Democratic (D): 1
Non-Democratic (ND): 0

Mixed (M): 1
Group/organization
Board/TMT/firm attributes: Board/TMT/firm characteristics,
behavior, ownership, (compensation), risk, performance,
legitimacy, &/or strategic change
OR Elite/party/parliament/government attributes: Elite/party/
parliament/government characteristics, behavior, ownership,
risk, performance, legitimacy, &/or strategic change

16 4 D: 6
ND: 18
M: 3

Environment
Cultural, economic, political, &/or institutional attributes 7 0 D: 10

ND: 5
M: 2

Event, characteristics, and theories of leadership succession
Event
Leader change 3 0 D: 0

ND: 0
M: 0

Characteristics
Internal/external succession or Intra-family/extra-family
succession

6 11 D: 0
ND: 0
M: 0

Planned succession (moving forward, completed term,
retirement)/unplanned succession (death, illness, dismissal,
resignation, interim)
OR Regular political succession (elections, appointment,
heredity, etc.)/irregular political succession (coup, revolution,
conflict, etc.)

6 6 D: 0
ND: 4
M: 0

Theories
Theories explaining leadership succession 0 4 0

Consequences of leadership succession
Individual
Leader attributes: Leader characteristics, behavior, ownership,
compensation, risk, performance, &/or legitimacy

2 2 D: 0
ND: 0
M: 0

Group/organization
Board/TMT/firm attributes: Board/TMT/firm characteristics,
behavior, ownership, (compensation), risk, performance,
legitimacy, &/or strategic change
OR Elite/party/parliament/government attributes: Elite/party/
parliament/government characteristics, behavior, ownership,
risk, performance, legitimacy, &/or strategic change

22 17 D: 2
ND: 0
M: 0

Environment
Cultural, economic, political, &/or institutional attributes 0 0 D: 0

ND: 0
M: 1

Total 75 49 53

B. Farah, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101289

13



assassination, execution, etc.), several analysts such as Goemans
(2008), Escribà-Folch (2013), Albertus and Menaldo (2014), and
Tanaka (2016) studied the manner [regular succession (election,
appointment, heredity, etc.) versus irregular succession (coup,
revolution, conflict, etc.)] and consequences of losing office with
respect to managing leader succession. Similar studies have been
conducted on planned/unplanned successions in PTOs and POFOs.

Mixed systems

Individual level antecedents: leader attributes
Women's political leadership worldwide and succession. The final group of
articles examined succession across mixed systems, i.e., democratic and
non-democratic systems. The current subcategory includes a single
paper examining women's worldwide political leadership by Jalalzai
and Krook (2010). In considering what factors explain the increased
election of women within some states but not others, the authors
examined both executive and legislative participation rates to conclude
that gendered power dynamics are still very much at work in the
political sphere. They noted the enduring natures of elite discrimination
against women and other non-dominant groups, finding that some key
“demand-side factors” explain why policies such as party gender quotas
have been unevenly successful across states.

Group/organization level antecedents: elite/party/parliament/government
attributes
Presidential systems and succession. Three articles concerned the relation
between presidential systems and succession. Marsteintredet and
Berntzen (2008) engaged Linz's astute observation that
presidentialism is a rigid regime which creates political conflict that
can overwhelm it. They found the pattern of presidential interruptions
over the last 28 years suggested Latin American presidentialism is no
longer marked by rigidity and reduced democratic legitimacy. In a
conceptual follow-up study, Marsteintredet (2014) presented a
typology of crises and presidential interruptions to help compare
cases of executive instability. Examining presidents who face term
limits, Baturo (2010) showed it is the magnitude of political spoils
along with the probability of retaining them that lures presidents to try
to overstay their limited tenure.

Environmental level antecedents: cultural, economic, political, &/or
institutional attributes
Incentive structures, rents, and succession. Another research question
asks: What sorts of incentives influence succession in mixed systems?
Konrad and Skaperdas (2007) presented a game theoretic treatment
demonstrating in the abstract that allowing individuals to compete to
succeed a leader, while retaining key assets such as life and property in
the event of a loss, is optimal for the leader. More recently, Debs (2016)
argued military dictators are more likely to transition quickly to
democracy than other kinds of dictators because they expect
democratic successors to use less violence and thus expect a large
improvement in their post-tenure fate.

Environmental level consequences: cultural, economic, political, &/or
institutional attributes
Succession and incentive structures and rents. Konrad and Mui (2017) in
another game theoretic treatment analyzed the benefits that may accrue
when leaders appoint successors. They found that appointing a
successor may make a coup more attractive for the successor and less
attractive for the other members of the elite. They also determined
conditions when the overall effect of appointing a successor benefits the
leader and enables him to acquire a larger share of the governance rent
in equilibrium. In the next three sections we turn to discuss future
directions for leadership succession in publicly-traded, privately-
owned, and political organizations.

Future directions for leadership succession in publicly-traded,
privately-owned, and political organizations

This section discusses important future research questions/direc-
tions that we believe are critical to better understand and move forward
the field of leadership succession in PTOs, POFOs, and POs in the near
future. These future directions emerged either from our literature re-
view of leadership succession in each of the three literatures or from
comparing each one of these literatures with its counterparts to identify
areas in which researchers in these literatures can learn from or provide
insights to their counterparts in the other literatures. While some of the
gaps among the three literatures are detectable by comparing Tables 1,
2, and 3, and looking at Table 4, in this section we focus on what we
consider the most important and impactful topics for evolving the field
and driving it forward in the near future based on what we uncovered
in our literature review.

Leadership succession and organizational performance/outcomes

Our review of the literature on leadership succession in PTOs shows
the relationship between leadership succession and organizational
outcomes, especially organizational performance, as the area that
draws the most attention, perhaps due to its importance to practi-
tioners. Most studies on leadership succession in PTOs used financial
measures, such as ROA, to account for organizational performance.
Very few studies on leadership succession in PTOs used the other
measures suggested by Rowe and Morrow Jr. (1999), particularly cor-
porate social responsibility. In our set of papers on leadership succes-
sion in PTOs, only Bernard et al. (2016) considered corporate social
performance. Given the gradual shift in strategy towards the triple
bottom line (profit, people, and planet) (Rothaermel, 2015), we believe
it is time for leadership succession researchers of PTOs and the other
two types of organizations to start studying the impact of leadership
succession on performance measures other than financial performance.
Recently some firms that ignored their social responsibilities have suf-
fered multiple leader successions in very short time periods. Examples
include, but are not limited to, Wells Fargo (Merle, 2016), Volkswagen
(Gibson, 2015), and British Petroleum (Mason, 2010).

An important research question, both theoretically and empirically,
then becomes whether a leader should be fired immediately following a
scandal despite an organization's successful financial/economic per-
formance? If so, should organizations promote internally, hire ex-
ternally, or appoint an interim leader until they find the “right” chief?
There is a wealth of research on this area in PTOs but not as much in
POFOs or POs, probably because unplanned successions are less fre-
quent and successors are generally more known in advance in these two
other types of organizations.

We also believe using different performance measures may be of
importance to the political succession literature. Using/developing
“people and/or planet” performance measures – such as Gross National
Happiness (GNH) (Tideman, 2016) among others – in addition to
measures such as deficits/surpluses and/or debt to GDP (analogous to
financial performance measures for PTOs and POFOs) may be inter-
esting for the political science field in general and the political lea-
dership succession sub-field in particular. A similar question could be
asked in the political arena: Following a scandal should the leader re-
sign immediately? If so, should the vice leader be promoted or should a
search for an outsider be undertaken, or a neutral custodian be ap-
pointed until a new leader emerges? Some countries have clearer
emergency succession processes than others; it would be interesting to
compare the outcomes of such emergency successions between coun-
tries with clearer emergency succession processes and countries with no
such clear processes. This research could help political entities avoid
chaos when scandals occur. While studying the impact of scandals on
succession (James, Wooten, & Dushek, 2011) is an important venue for
all organizations, understanding what led to an organization's corporate

B. Farah, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101289

14



social irresponsibility, e.g., the leader's characteristics or compensation
package composition, social and political embeddedness, among others
may be highly informative in vetting new candidates for leadership
positions.

Leader characteristics are not the only factors that affect post-suc-
cession performance. Bilgili et al. (2017) find that organizations play a
role in improving post-succession performance by influencing the per-
ceptions of shareholders of the firm undergoing succession through
organizational narratives. While this is an important finding for PTOs, it
can also be interesting for POFOs and POs. It is interesting to theore-
tically find the components of a political speech post succession that
can unite voters/constituents around the elected/appointed leader. It is
also interesting to empirically compare winning speeches and dissect
their components and study their impact on the degree of unity of the
members of POs. We believe this can have an important impact on the
practice of political leadership succession.

Another organizational outcome of interest for PTOs is strategic
change. Previously, researchers tended to believe that insiders are
trained by their predecessors and hence are psychologically and cog-
nitively attached to the current strategy of the firm and so may not
induce strategic change (Bigley & Wiersema, 2002). More recent studies
take into consideration additional factors that may affect new CEOs'
abilities to induce change such as their origin, insiders versus outsiders,
their alignment with their predecessors' thinking, and whether the
predecessor departs the firm or is retained as board chair after suc-
cession occurs (Karaevli & Zajac, 2013; Nakauchi & Wiersema, 2015;
Quigley & Hambrick, 2012; Zhang & Rajagopalan, 2010). Yet still much
remains unanswered. Despite the multiple calls to use qualitative
methods in CEO succession studies (André, 2009; Berns & Klarner,
2017; Giambatista et al., 2005), there is a dearth of qualitative studies
in PTOs. Qualitative studies are very common in POs, and are becoming
more accepted and valued in the strategy field (Bansal & Corley, 2011,
2012; Langley & Abdallah, 2011). It might be the right time for business
leadership succession researchers to use qualitative research to com-
plement findings from quantitative research (Lee, 1991; Miller, 2005).
Zhang and Rajagopalan (2010) called for qualitative and survey studies
to help better understand the differences in the change dynamics be-
tween outside and inside CEOs. Qualitative studies may also be more
suited to assess whether a strategic change is in the mandate of the
CEO. Given that inside CEOs are usually promoted in successful orga-
nizations and boards are generally not in favor of major strategic
changes in such cases. Whereas outside CEOs are usually recruited with
the mandate to induce important strategic changes. We believe that this
would affect the interpretation of results if we only look at publicly
available data. We think taking into consideration qualitative studies
that help us comprehend the new CEO's mandate would help re-
searchers and practitioners better understand the factors that drive
strategic change.

While the field of political science may enrich the methodology of
the PTOs' succession field, we believe borrowing the concept of stra-
tegic change may enrich political succession studies. Similar to ques-
tions raised for PTOs, political science researchers can ask whether just
a change in the political mindset of the new leader, from liberal to
conservative or vice versa (i.e., a successor characteristic), should lead
to a strategic change in a government's direction even if the government
did well under the previous leader, or whether change should affect
only certain areas but not others. To achieve this, strategic change
should be conceptualized and measured at the country or party level
then POs' researchers can collect data at the country or party level
following several successions that took place.

One obvious difference we noticed in comparing the research on
leadership succession and performance in the three literatures is the
minimal concern political scientists devote to the relationship between
successor characteristics and performance. The CEO succession litera-
ture in business is well stocked with examinations comparing whether
“insider” candidates who become leaders outperform “outsider”

candidates. As well, other kinds of characteristics, such as gender, are
considered when assessing the organizational impact of leader choice in
business organizations whether PTOs or POFOs. However, our collec-
tion of political analyses leaves the question of how leader character-
istics may influence key performance outcomes, such as party cohesion,
candidate recruitment, or voter perception, largely unaddressed. Which
characteristics are more important for political leaders and why (e.g.
integrity, charisma, diplomacy, persistence, flexibility, etc.)? How does
leader succession influence political performance? While a few analysts
engage in such questions, like Bolleyer and Bytzek (2017), along with
Ennser-Jedenastik and Müller (2015), these questions merit much more
focus.

Our review of the literature on performance before and after lea-
dership succession in POFOs showed the following. First, our review
identified only four recent impactful articles studying the important
effect of family firm performance on leadership succession in POFOs
(André, 2009; González et al., 2015; Hillier & McColgan, 2009; Tsai
et al., 2009). Hillier and McColgan (2009) showed that family CEOs
were less likely than non-family CEOs to depart their positions fol-
lowing poor family firm performance. However, André (2009) criti-
cized Hillier and McColgan's (2009) study suggesting it had several
issues, such as performance measurement and sample selection among
others and thus arguing this relationship required further investigation.
Given the important research and practical implications of such a re-
lationship, we believe more research needs to be done on this important
relationship to have more evidence either supporting or rejecting
Hillier and McColgan's (2009) conclusion. More insight on this re-
lationship in family firms may also, distantly and indirectly help inform
relationships in monarchies in political succession, since it is almost
impossible to conduct similar studies on monarchies, given that by
definition when a successor is not from the ruling family the rule of the
monarchy has ended.

Second, our review also identified some recent impactful articles
studying the important effect of family versus non-family CEO succes-
sion on family firm performance. For example, Pérez-González (2006),
Bennedsen et al. (2007), and Cucculelli and Micucci (2008) found that
family CEO successions, as compared to non-family professional CEO
successions, had a negative impact on family firm performance. How-
ever, it is obvious from the literature and from real-life experience that,
despite these findings, families tend to prefer intra-family successions
over extra family successions. Nonetheless, only very recently, Pan
et al. (2018) examined a factor – corporate philanthropy – that could
help mitigate the negative impact of family-CEO succession on family
firm performance. We believe more studies are needed to investigate
additional factors, moderators, and mediators that may mitigate this
important family CEO succession-performance relationship. This re-
lationship also suggests that when families pass the baton to family
members, they have in mind considerations other than just short-term
financial performance (e.g., long-term family firm survival, longevity,
etc.). Future research needs to uncover what these considerations are
that may be as important, if not more important, to family firm CEO
incumbents, than their firm's short-term performance. This may also
indirectly inform political leadership succession in monarchies and
dictatorships, in which the survival, continuity, and longevity of these
monarchies and dictatorships may become more important to incum-
bents than how well they are serving their people.

Leadership succession and gender/primogeniture

Our review of the recent impactful literature on leadership succes-
sion and gender/primogeniture in POFOs identified only two articles
(Haberman & Danes, 2007; Vera & Dean, 2005) despite the importance
of implicit and/or explicit gender/primogeniture considerations in the
successor selection process in family firms. These considerations are not
only important in leadership succession in family firms but may be even
more important in leadership successions in POs such as monarchies

B. Farah, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101289

15



and dictatorships. The two articles we identified generally discuss the
challenges daughters face in family business succession and find that
male first-child firms are more likely to pass on control to a family CEO
than are female first-child firms. For instance, in the Middle East, when
it comes to inheritance and tax law, many countries' inheritance and tax
laws follow religious/sectarian laws that are very different from Wes-
tern civil law and, in certain cases, may prohibit transferring wealth (in
family businesses) or power (in monarchies) to daughters.

That said, we are in an era in which gender equity in general and in
leadership succession in particular is increasing around the world.
However, this progress is still generally fairly slow, but faster in some
parts of the world than others. This suggests several timely research
questions need to be addressed in the near future. Research questions
such as: how do culture-, country-, and/or region-specific gender-re-
lated beliefs, norms, practices, etc. differentially influence succession
processes and outcomes in family firms (and monarchies)? Do egali-
tarian families (monarchs) distribute ownership and leadership of their
family firms (monarchies) among their male and female children, and if
so how? How are the media in general and the social media in parti-
cular influencing perceptions on gender and how is this influencing
leadership succession processes and decisions in privately-owned/fa-
mily firms (and monarchies)?

Moreover, in the leadership succession in POs literature, there is a
clear need for more sustained and comprehensive research on the
feminization of political elites and their role in succession processes. We
argue the same for the other two literatures. We need to know more
about what sorts of women are populating business and political elites,
how they negotiate among and between groups, and how they approach
power. In the conclusion of her study of gender, political performance,
and party leadership, O'Brien (2015: 1036) points out that “parties are
themselves fundamentally gendered institutions,” and so “in-
corporating gender will thus shed new light on the “black box” of in-
traparty politics.” Jalalzai and Krook (2010: 19) survey the global
feminization trend in legislatures across the globe, noting that while
there are record numbers of women in cabinet positions, politics is still
largely viewed as “a man's world.” In light of our search revealing only
2% of the POs' articles (one of 53 studies) substantively focused on the
role of gender, we conclude there is much necessity to understand how
gender affects, and is affected by, change in political executives.

Leader tenure

CEO tenure is used to predict many dependent variables in the CEO
succession literature including organizational performance. While the
CEO position is known to be demanding, we see many CEOs reluctant to
let go of their organizations especially if the organization is successful.
Leaders in family businesses enjoy longer tenures and are more en-
trenched than in PTOs (Oswald & Muse, 2009). Dangerously though,
CEO reluctance to leave may lead to the exit of very capable successors
(Cannella & Shen, 2001; Lehmberg, Rowe, White, & Phillips, 2009) who
lose hope of reaching the CEO position. Lehmberg et al. (2009) studied
the impact on firm performance when firms hired executives who had
left General Electric during the twenty year tenure of Jack Welch.

In addition, Henderson, Miller, and Hambrick (2006) found that
firm performance has an inverted U-shaped relation with CEO tenure,
hence the relation between CEO tenure and firm performance is first
positive then becomes negative beyond a certain point in time and it
turns negative earlier in more dynamic, than in less dynamic, in-
dustries. While this is one of the very few academic studies discussing
CEOs' tenure, albeit indirectly, practitioners and consultants are still
expressing concerns about “open” terms for CEOs. Mader (2006) and
Whitehead (2011) have supported term limits. They state that CEOs
should have an optimum time to serve irrespective of their age. For
example, the Governor of Central Bank of Kenya, Patrick Njorge, is in
favor of setting a limited term for CEOs after some of the veteran CEOs
failed to pay their loans (Herbling, 2016). Others disagree. Myatt

(2013) and Abou-El-Fotouh (2018) argue that good leadership is hard
to find and they support the retention of good CEOs irrespective of their
tenure length. Sonnenfeld (2015) argues that it depends on the CEO
whether he or she is a monarch who would like to stay at the helm
indefinitely, or a general who returns to the company to save it, or an
ambassador who trains an heir apparent to succeed him/her and then
leaves, or a governor with a short but effective term at the office.

Yet if we look at the sibling field of political succession, especially in
democratic systems with explicit term limit laws, no matter how suc-
cessful or popular are the leaders, they have to cede their position upon
completion of their term. Although defined leadership terms may apply
in some PTOs and POFOs, such as Deloitte, which imposes a tenure
limited to two consecutive four-year terms (Bradt, 2018; Mount, 2013),
and many universities which impose similar kinds of defined terms on
their presidents, it may be advantageous for firms to experiment with
such defined leadership terms and may be interesting for business re-
searchers to investigate whether defined or undefined terms result in
better succession and performance. PTO scholars may extend
Henderson et al.'s (2006) study and compare the effect of CEOs' tenure
on firm performance in limited term firms with unlimited term firms
and across industries. Optimization models can be used to identify the
optimal tenures of CEOs in different industries.

Leader removal/dismissal

CEO dismissal in PTOs research has been directly linked to firm fi-
nancial performance. Researchers found that poor financial perfor-
mance is the major cause for CEO dismissal; however, more recently
researchers found mitigating factors, such as structural power (Pi &
Lowe, 2011) and political connectedness (You & Du, 2012), that might
affect this relationship, keeping a poor performer in the CEO position.
This research has been conducted in the Chinese context mainly and
given that China has a unique political system in which political con-
nectedness may have more influence than in other contexts, it might be
interesting to validate this research in different cultures. There is less
research done on leader dismissal in POs and POFOs and probably for
valid reasons. However, it might be interesting to study the mitigating
factors that might influence the removal of poor performers in these
two fields. Understanding the mitigating factors might enrich these two
fields both theoretically and empirically and might improve practice.
Understanding what prevents dismissal of poor performers may moti-
vate the custodians of the succession process to seek removal of these
leaders through the appropriate channels when necessary.

The “participatory revolution” and succession

Our review of leadership succession in POs showed that along with
the entry of larger numbers of women into modern political executives,
another group of newcomers merits much more analytical attention in
future research. Our analysis suggests several leading scholars, in-
cluding Kenig (2009), Kenig (2008), Cross and Blais (2012), and Barnea
and Rahat (2007), are concentrating attention on the “participatory
revolution” that is underway within the selectorates of many democ-
racies. This is meritorious as efforts to expand the group controlling
party leader selection in democratic systems carries with it a host of
consequences that are only now beginning to be articulated. Indeed,
several of the analyses in our collection of political democratic studies
are not designed to consider a changing selectorate. For example, in the
conclusion of his study of how change in the party leader reduces voter
disagreement about party positions, Somer-Topcu underscores that his
analysis is limited in this regard. He writes: “we do not know whether
the process of leadership selection influences voter perceptions. Do
voters learn more about party positions when the party members elect
the party leader in a one-member, one-vote system as compared to
selection by the party executive committee?” (2017: 7). We need to
know more about what the democratization of the selectorate implies

B. Farah, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101289

16



for the process and result of executive succession.

Leadership succession and institutions

Our review of leadership succession in POs also demonstrated there
is ample focus on the role of institutions across democratic and non-
democratic systems with respect to understanding succession. There is
much attention because institutions matter significantly in how suc-
cessions unfold and in their consequences. Moreover, institutional ef-
fects often are subtle and counter-intuitive, revealed only through
careful analysis. Going forward, several analysts recommend devoting
more attention to key institutional factors, particularly in how they
interact with other elements and factors. Kenig (2009), Wauters (2014),
Horiuchi et al. (2015), Konrad and Mui (2017), and Frantz and Stein
(2017), among others, emphasize the need to pursue additional re-
search focused on institutional factors, along with situational and per-
haps psychological factors, to fully explore the role of institutions in
leadership succession. As Ennser-Jedenastik and Müller (2015) con-
clude, research on party leader survival is very much in its infancy, and
so a better understanding of the institutional determinants of leader
selection and deselection is crucial for students of democratic politics.

Leadership succession around the world

This section discusses future directions related to factors affecting
succession in different cultures, countries, and regions. Our review of
leadership succession in POFOs identified several articles that studied
leadership succession in POFOs in distinct single countries, such as in
Italy, Lebanon, China, Turkey, etc. (Cucculelli & Micucci, 2008; Fahed-
Sreih & Djoundourian, 2006; Tatoglu et al., 2008; Yan & Sorenson,
2006). Except for Yan and Sorenson (2006), these and the other articles
on leadership succession in POFOs have rarely, if at all, investigated in
any depth the impact of the culture, country, or region in which these
studies were conducted on the succession process. In contrast, a good
number of the political leadership succession articles included com-
parative studies among countries. However, among the POFO succes-
sion articles, only Carney et al. (2014) comparatively studied the di-
vergent impact of inheritance law in four different countries (Germany,
France, Hong Kong, and USA) on succession and continuity in family
firms.

Thus, more comparative cultural, national, and regional studies on
leadership succession in POFOs and PTOs are needed to help better
understand the impact of various external factors (e.g. demographic,
economic, legal, institutional, etc.) on leadership succession in these
organizations. For instance, certain cultures, such as those with strong
traditions of long-term orientation and social obligations, may facilitate
specific types of succession over others. Moreover, in certain national or
regional cultures intra-family successions may be more or less common
and/or legitimate than others, the same way in certain national or re-
gional cultures democratic or non-democratic political leadership suc-
cessions may be more or less common and/or legitimate than others.
Studying the impact of various external factors related to cultural, na-
tional, and regional differences on leadership succession in all three
organizational types would significantly advance our understanding of
leadership succession in different international contexts.

What business and political successions may learn (from each
other)

In this paper we reviewed the literatures on leadership succession in
PTOs, POFOs, and POs. We also proposed future directions that we
believe are critical to move forward the leadership succession field in
the three areas in the near future. In this concluding section, based on
Fig. 1, Tables 1, 2, 3, and 4 (and particularly Table 4), and our literature
review and future directions sections, we further integrate the three
literatures on leadership succession by discussing their similarities and

differences, what all three literatures may learn from this review, what
each literature may learn from the other literatures, and what addi-
tional important research questions should be studied in the near fu-
ture.

Similarities among the three literatures (and what all three literatures may
learn from this review)

Among other things, our literature review and future directions
sections revealed the following similarities. All three literatures have
limitedly studied the relationship between gender (and primogeniture)
and succession; given the timeliness of this topic, we think all three
literatures can benefit from a deeper understanding of this relationship
and its implications.

Reviewing Fig. 1, Tables 1, 2, 3, and 4 (and particularly Table 4)
and our literature review and future directions sections revealed the
following additional similarities that were not discussed in the three
previous future directions sections. First, characteristics of leadership
successions, namely, planned versus unplanned business successions
and regular versus irregular political successions, have been fairly well
studied in all three literatures; yet, given the benefits of planned busi-
ness successions and regular political successions and the detriments of
unplanned business successions and irregular political successions we
think more research examining leadership succession characteristics in
general and what factors increase the likelihood of planned and regular
successions and decrease the likelihood of unplanned and irregular
successions in particular would significantly advance leadership suc-
cession research and practice.

Second, the impact of succession on leaders' attributes has been
limitedly studied in all three literatures, particularly in POs; given John
Acton's famous quote “Power tends to corrupt and absolute power
corrupts absolutely,” conducting research examining whether/how
becoming a leader changes a person's behavior in general and ex-
amining how valid such quotes are would be interesting and useful to
succession researchers and practitioners.

Third, the effect of succession on environmental attributes (cultural,
economic, political, and/or institutional attributes) has been barely
studied in all three literatures; although one would expect environ-
mental attributes to impact leaders' succession more than one would
expect leaders' succession to impact environmental attributes, many
new leaders significantly impact their environments, such as the in-
dustries, institutions, political landscapes, or the other environments
they operate in; investigating what incoming leaders' attributes may
lead to such environmental changes can advance succession research
and practice.

Differences among the three literatures (and what each literature may learn
from the others)

Among other things, our literature review and future directions
sections revealed the following differences. Leader attributes and suc-
cession has been well studied in PTOs and POFOs but limitedly studied
in POs; understanding how, when, and what leader characteristics im-
pact succession and performance in all three organizations, but parti-
cularly in POs, will enrich the understanding of leadership succession
researchers and practitioners in all three literatures.

Moreover, organizational performance before and after succession
has been studied in PTOs and POFOs but barely in POs; given the im-
portance of these relationships we think that all three literatures, but
particularly the POs literature, can benefit from further examining these
relationships in new ways and using additional organization-relevant
measures of performance.

Furthermore, leader term limits have been studied in POs (Maltz,
2007) but rarely in PTOs and POFOs. Given the significant implications
of term limits in politics, one may wonder whether term limits would
have similar implications in business. Investigating whether, why, how,

B. Farah, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101289

17



and when leader term limits would benefit or hurt business organiza-
tions may be a fruitful avenue for future research on leadership suc-
cession in business organizations.

Reviewing Fig. 1, Tables 1, 2, 3, and 4 (and particularly Table 4)
and our literature review and future directions sections revealed the
following additional differences that were not discussed in the three
previous future directions sections.

First, the impact of environmental attributes (cultural, economic,
political, and/or institutional attributes) on succession has been studied
in PTOs and POs but barely in POFOs. Studying the impact of en-
vironmental attributes on succession in POFOs (e.g. studying the impact
of family norms in different cultures/countries on succession) would
advance leadership succession research and practice in POFOs in par-
ticular and succession research and practice in the field in general.

Second, characteristics of leadership successions, namely, internal
versus external successions and intra-family versus extra-family suc-
cessions, have been well studied in PTOs and POFOs but limitedly
studied in POs. Studying presidential, prime ministerial, etc. intra-party
(i.e. from the same party) versus extra-party (i.e. from another party)
successions and their effects on countries' policies, economies, security
situations, etc. may advance leadership succession research and prac-
tice in POs.

Third, our review located some theory papers attempting to broadly

explain the leadership succession phenomenon in POFOs but barely any
theory papers attempting to broadly explain this phenomenon in PTOs
or POs. We hope this observation encourages researchers and practi-
tioners from the three leadership succession areas to collaborate more
and learn from one another in both research and practice to ideally
develop a general normative theory of leadership succession, since such
a scholarly theory does not exist yet and its existence would certainly
help move the scholarly leadership succession field forward and better
guide practitioners in their succession decisions.

Acknowledgements

The first author acknowledges the support provided by the
American University of Beirut (AUB) University Research Board (URB)
grant [grant number 103606, for academic year 2018–2019].

This work benefited from the advice and comments of several col-
leagues at the Olayan School of Business (OSB) during OSB's Research
Series and other conversations, particularly Yusuf Sidani and Charlotte
Karam. It also benefited from the help of the research assistant Elie Abi
Saad.

We would like to especially thank LQYR Editor David Day and two
anonymous reviewers for an insightful and constructive review process.

Appendix A

Table A.1
Leadership succession articles that include hybrid samples from both publicly-traded organizations (PTOs) and privately-owned/family organizations (POFOs).

Bach, L., & Serrano-Velarde, N. 2015. CEO identity and labor contracts: Evidence from CEO transitions. Journal of Corporate Finance, 33(4), 227–242.
Bennedsen, M., Fan, J. P., Jian, M., & Yeh, Y.-H. 2015. The family business map: Framework, selective survey, and evidence from Chinese family firm succession. Journal of Corporate
Finance, 33(4), 212–226.
Calabrò, A., Minichilli, A., Amore, M. D., & Brogi, M. 2017. The courage to choose! Primogeniture and leadership succession in family firms. Strategic Management Journal, 37(7),
2014–2035.
Chen, X., Cheng, Q., & Dai, Z. 2013. Family ownership and CEO turnovers. Contemporary Accounting Research, 30(3), 1166–1190.
Dwivedi, P., Joshi, A., & Misangyi, V. F. 2018. Gender-inclusive gatekeeping: How (mostly male) predecessors influence the success of female CEOs. Academy of Management Journal,
61(2), 379–404.
Eklund, J., Palmberg, J., & Wiberg, D. 2013. Inherited corporate control and returns on investment. Small Business Economics, 41(2), 419–431.
Minichilli, A., Nordqvist, M., Corbetta, G., & Amore, M. D. 2014. CEO succession mechanisms, organizational context, and performance: A socio-emotional wealth perspective on
family-controlled firms. Journal of Management Studies, 51(7), 1153–1179.
Tsai, W.-H., Hung, J.-H., Kuo, Y.-C., & Kuo, L. 2006. CEO tenure in Taiwanese family and nonfamily firms: An agency theory perspective. Family Business Review, 19(1), 11–28.
Yoo, S. S., Schenkel, M. T., & Kim, J. 2014. Examining the impact of inherited succession identity on family firm performance. Journal of Small Business Management, 52(2), 246–265

References

Abou-El-Fotouh, H. (2018). The misconception about CEO tenures. Corporate governance
instituteCorporate Governance Institute Online:.

Adams, J. C., & Mansi, S. A. (2009). CEO turnover and bondholder wealth. Journal of
Banking & Finance, 33(3), 522–533.

Aguilera, R. V., & Jackson, G. (2010). Comparative and international corporate govern-
ance. Academy of Management Annals, 4(1), 485–556.

Albertus, M., & Menaldo, V. (2014). Dealing with dictators: Negotiated democratization
and the fate of outgoing autocrats. International Studies Quarterly, 58(3), 550–565.

Amore, M. D., Minichilli, A., & Corbetta, G. (2011). How do managerial successions shape
corporate financial policies in family firms? Journal of Corporate Finance, 17(4),
1016–1027.

André, P. (2009). Discussion of firm performance and managerial succession in family
managed firms. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting, 36(3–4), 485–495.

Antonakis, J. (2017a). The future of the leadership quarterly. Leadership Quarterly,
1(28), 1–4.

Antonakis, J. (2017b). On doing better science: From thrill of discovery to policy im-
plications. Leadership Quarterly, 28(1), 5–21.

Arthaud-Day, M. L., Certo, S. T., Dalton, C. M., & Dalton, D. R. (2006). A changing of the
guard: Executive and director turnover following corporate financial restatements.
Academy of Management Journal, 49(6), 1119–1136.

Baker, W. F., & FitzPatrick, B. A. (2010). Presidential succession scenarios in popular
culture and history and the need for reform. Fordham Law Review, 79(3), 835–849.

Ballinger, G. A., & Marcel, J. J. (2010). The use of an interim CEO during succession
episodes and firm performance. Strategic Management Journal, 31(3), 262–283.

Balsmeier, B., Buchwald, A., & Zimmermann, S. (2013). The influence of top management
corporate networks on CEO succession. Review of Managerial Science, 7(3), 191–221.

Bansal, P., & Corley, K. (2011). The coming of age for qualitative research: Embracing the
diversity of qualitative methods. Academy of Management Journal, 54(2), 233–237.

Bansal, P., & Corley, K. (2012). Publishing in AMJ - part 7: What's different about qua-
litative research? Academy of Management Journal, 55(3), 509–513.

Barnea, S., & Rahat, G. (2007). Reforming candidate selection methods: A three-level
approach. Party Politics, 13(3), 375–394.

Baturo, A. (2010). The stakes of losing office, term limits and democracy. British Journal of
Political Science, 40(3), 635–662.

Behn, B. K., Riley, R. A., & Yang, Y. W. (2005). The value of an heir apparent in succession
planning. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 13(2), 168–177.

Bennedsen, M., Nielsen, K., Pérez-González, F., & Wolfenzon, D. (2007). Inside the family
firm: The role of families in succession decisions and performance. Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 122(2), 647–691.

Bennister, M., 't Hart, P., & Worthy, B. 2015. Assessing the authority of political office-
holders: The leadership capital index. West European Politics, 38(3): 417–440.

Bernard, Y., Godard, L., & Zouaoui, M. (2016). The effect of CEOs' turnover on the cor-
porate sustainability performance of French firms. Journal of Business Ethics, 1–21.

Berns, K. V., & Klarner, P. (2017). A review of the CEO succession literature and a future
research program. Academy of Management Perspectives, 31(2), 83–108.

Berry, T. K., Bizjak, J. M., Lemmon, M. L., & Naveen, L. (2006). Organizational com-
plexity and CEO labor markets: Evidence from diversified firms. Journal of Corporate
Finance, 12(4), 797–817.

Bigley, G. A., & Wiersema, M. F. (2002). New CEOs and corporate strategic refocusing:
How experience as heir apparent influences the use of power. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 47(4), 707–727.

Bilgili, H., Tochman Campbell, J., Ellstrand, A. E., & Johnson, J. L. (2017). Riding off into
the sunset: Organizational sensegiving, shareholder sensemaking, and reactions to
CEO retirement. Journal of Management Studies, 54(7), 1019–1049.

Blank, S. (2008). The Putin succession and its implications for Russian politics. Post-Soviet
Affairs, 24(3), 231–262.

Blumentritt, T., Mathews, T., & Marchisio, G. (2012). Game theory and family business
succession: An introduction. Family Business Review, 26(1), 51–67.

Bolleyer, N., & Bytzek, E. (2017). New party performance after breakthrough: Party

B. Farah, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101289

18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0150


origin, building and leadership. Party Politics, 23(6), 772–782.
Bornemann, S., Kick, T., Pfingsten, A., & Schertler, A. (2015). Earnings baths by CEOs

during turnovers: Empirical evidence from German savings banks. Journal of Banking
& Finance, 53, 188–201.

Boyer, M. M., & Ortiz-Molina, H. (2008). Career concerns of top executives, managerial
ownership and CEO succession. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 16(3),
178–193.

Bradt, G. (2018). Executive onboarding note: Should CEOs have term limits? Forbes (Online:
Forbes).

Brockhaus, R. H. (2004). Family business succession: Suggestions for future research.
Family Business Review, 17(2), 165–177.

Brownlee, J. (2007). Hereditary succession in modern autocracies. World Politics, 59(4),
595–628.

Brun de Pontet, S., Wrosch, C., & Gagne, M. (2007). An exploration of the generational
differences in levels of control held among family businesses approaching succession.
Family Business Review, 20(4), 337–354.

Bueno de Mesquita, B., & Smith, A. (2017). Political succession: A model of coups, re-
volution, purges, and everyday politics. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 61(4), 707–743.

Bushman, R., Dai, Z., & Wang, X. (2010). Risk and CEO turnover. Journal of Financial
Economics, 96(3), 381–398.

Bynander, F., & t Hart, P. (2006). When power changes hands: The political psychology of
leadership succession in democracies. Political Psychology, 27(5), 707–730.

Cabrera-Suarez, K. (2005). Leadership transfer and the successor's development in the
family firm. Leadership Quarterly, 16(1), 71–96.

Cadieux, L. (2007). Succession in small and medium-sized family businesses: Toward a
typology of predecessor roles during and after instatement of the successor. Family
Business Review, 20(2), 95–109.

Campbell, T. C., Gallmeyer, M., Johnson, S. A., Rutherford, J., & Stanley, B. W. (2011).
CEO optimism and forced turnover. Journal of Financial Economics, 101(3), 695–712.

Cannella, A. A., & Shen, W. (2001). So close and yet so far: Promotion versus exit for CEO
heirs apparent. Academy of Management Journal, 44(2), 252–270.

Cao, Q., Maruping, L., & Takeuchi, R. (2006). Disentangling the effects of CEO turnover
and succession on organizational capabilities: A social network perspective.
Organization Science, 17(5), 563–576.

Carney, M., Gedajlovic, E., & Strike, V. M. (2014). Dead money: Inheritance law and the
longevity of family firms. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 38(6), 1261–1283.

Cater, J. J., III, Kidwell, R. E., & Camp, K. M. (2016). Successor team dynamics in family
firms. Family Business Review, 29(3), 301–326.

Charan, R. (2005). Ending the CEO succession crisis. Harvard Business Review, 83(2),
72–81.

Cheeseman, N. (2010). African elections as vehicles for change. Journal of Democracy,
21(4), 139–153.

Chen, G., & Hambrick, D. C. (2012). CEO replacement in turnaround situations: Executive
(mis)fit and its performance implications. Organization Science, 23(1), 225–243.

Chen, G., Luo, S., Tang, Y., & Tong, J. (2015). Passing probation: Earnings management
by interim CEOs and its effect on their promotion prospects. Academy of Management
Journal, 58(5), 1389–1418.

Chittoor, R., & Das, R. (2007). Professionalization of management and succession
performance—A vital linkage. Family Business Review, 20(1), 65–79.

Chiu, S.-c., Johnson, R. A., Hoskisson, R. E., & Pathak, S. (2016). The impact of CEO
successor origin on corporate divestiture scale and scope change. The Leadership
Quarterly, 27(4), 617–633.

Chung, C. N., & Luo, X. (2013). Leadership succession and firm performance in an
emerging economy: Successor origin, relational embeddedness, and legitimacy.
Strategic Management Journal, 34(3), 338–357.

Citrin, J. M., & Ogden, D. (2010). Succeeding at succession. Harvard Business Review,
88(11), 29–31.

Clayton, M. J., Hartzell, J. C., & Rosenberg, J. V. (2005). The impact of CEO turnover on
equity volatility. The Journal of Business, 78(5), 1779–1808.

Connelly, B. L., Ketchen, D. J., Gangloff, K. A., & Shook, C. L. (2016). Investor perceptions
of CEO successor selection in the wake of integrity and competence failures: A policy
capturing study. Strategic Management Journal, 37(10), 2135–2151.

Conyon, M. J., & He, L. (2014). CEO turnover in China: The role of market-based and
accounting performance measures. The European Journal of Finance, 20(7–9),
657–680.

Cross, W., & Blais, A. (2012). Who selects the party leader? Party Politics, 18(2), 127–150.
Crossland, C., & Chen, G. (2013). Executive accountability around the world: Sources of

cross-national variation in firm performance - CEO dismissal sensitivity. Strategic
Organization, 11(1), 78–109.

Cucculelli, M., & Micucci, G. (2008). Family succession and firm performance: Evidence
from Italian family firms. Journal of Corporate Finance, 14(1), 17–31.

Dalpiaz, E., Tracey, P., & Phillips, N. (2014). Succession narratives in family business: The
case of Alessi. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 38(6), 1375–1394.

Davidson, W. N., Nemec, C., & Worrell, D. L. (2006). Determinants of CEO age at suc-
cession. Journal of Management & Governance, 10(1), 35–57.

Davidson, W. N., Ning, Y., Rakowski, D., & Elsaid, E. (2008). The antecedents of si-
multaneous appointments to CEO and chair. Journal of Management & Governance,
12(4), 381–401.

Day, D. V. (2017). Call for papers: The leadership quarterly yearly review (LQYR) for
2019. Leadership Quarterly, 28(4), V.

De Massis, A., Chua, J. H., & Chrisman, J. J. (2008). Factors preventing intra-family
succession. Family Business Review, 21(2), 183–199.

De Massis, A., Sieger, P., Chua, J. H., & Vismara, S. (2016). Incumbents' attitude toward
intrafamily succession an investigation of its antecedents. Family Business Review,
29(3), 278–300.

Debs, A. (2016). Living by the sword and dying by the sword? Leadership transitions in

and out of dictatorships. International Studies Quarterly, 60(1), 73–84.
DeNoble, A., Ehrlich, S., & Singh, G. (2007). Toward the development of a family business

self-efficacy scale: A resource-based perspective. Family Business Review, 20(2),
127–140.

Dikolli, S. S., Mayew, W. J., & Nanda, D. (2014). CEO tenure and the performance-
turnover relation. Review of Accounting Studies, 19(1), 281–327.

Dionne, S. D. (2017). Leadership quarterly yearly review: Multidisciplinary, multilevel,
multisource, multiskilled and multigenerational perspectives. Leadership Quarterly,
28(1), 22–23.

Diwisch, D. S., Voithofer, P., & Weiss, C. R. (2009). Succession and firm growth: Results
from a non-parametric matching approach. Small Business Economics, 32(1), 45–56.

Donno, D. (2013). Elections and democratization in authoritarian regimes. American
Journal of Political Science, 57(3), 703–716.

Eddleston, K., Kellermanns, F., Floyd, S., Crittenden, V., & Crittenden, W. (2013).
Planning for growth: Life stage differences in family firms. Entrepreneurship Theory
and Practice, 37(5), 1177–1202.

Eisfeldt, A. L., & Kuhnen, C. M. (2013). CEO turnover in a competitive assignment fra-
mework. Journal of Financial Economics, 109, 351–372.

Elosge, C., Oesterle, M.-J., Stein, C., & Hattula, S. (2018). CEO succession and firms' in-
ternationalization processes: Insights from German companies. International Business
Review, 27(2), 367–379.

Ennser-Jedenastik, L., & Müller, W. C. (2015). Intra-party democracy, political perfor-
mance and the survival of party leaders: Austria, 1945–2011. Party Politics, 21(6),
930–943.

Ertugrul, M., & Krishnan, K. (2011). Can CEO dismissals be proactive? Journal of
Corporate Finance, 17(1), 134–151.

Escribà-Folch, A. (2013). Accountable for what? Regime types, performance, and the fate
of outgoing dictators, 1946–2004. Democratization, 20(1), 160–185.

Fahed-Sreih, J., & Djoundourian, S. (2006). Determinants of longevity and success in
Lebanese family businesses: An exploratory study. Family Business Review, 19(3),
225–234.

Fan, J. P., Wong, T.-J., & Zhang, T. (2012). Founder succession and accounting properties.
Contemporary Accounting Research, 29(1), 283–311.

Faucher, F. (2015). Leadership elections: What is at stake for parties? A comparison of the
British labour party and the Parti Socialiste. Parliamentary Affairs, 68(4), 794–820.

Fiordelisi, F., & Ricci, O. (2014). Corporate culture and CEO turnover. Journal of Corporate
Finance, 28, 66–82.

Fitzsimmons, T. W., & Callan, V. J. (2016). CEO selection: A capital perspective. The
Leadership Quarterly, 27(5), 765–787.

Fleming, J. (2010). Presidential succession: The art of the possible. Fordham Law Review,
79(3), 951–958.

Frantz, E., & Stein, E. A. (2017). Countering coups: Leadership succession rules in dic-
tatorships. Comparative Political Studies, 50(7), 935–962.

Freedom House (2018). Freedom in the world 2018: Table of country scores. Vol.
2018Freedom House Online:.

Gabay, C. (2014). Two ‘transitions’: The political economy of Joyce Banda's rise to power
and the related role of civil society organisations in Malawi. Review of African Political
Economy, 41(141), 374–388.

Gagnè, M., Wrosch, C., & Brun de Pontet, S. (2011). Retiring from the family business:
The role of goal adjustment capacities. Family Business Review, 24(4), 292–304.

Gandhi, J., & Przeworski, A. (2007). Authoritarian institutions and the survival of auto-
crats. Comparative Political Studies, 40(11), 1279–1301.

Gardner, R. J., Jr. (2009). Corporate leadership selection: Impact on American business,
employees, and society. Indiana, US: Author House.

Georgakakis, D., & Ruigrok, W. (2017). CEO succession origin and firm performance: A
multilevel study. Journal of Management Studies, 54(1), 58–87.

Giambatista, R. C., Rowe, W. G., & Riaz, S. (2005). Nothing succeeds like succession: A
critical review of leader succession literature since 1994. Leadership Quarterly, 16(6),
963–991.

Gibson, K. (2015). Volkswagen CEO steps down as crisis escalates. MoneyWatchCBS News
Online:.

Gilding, M., Gregory, S., & Cosson, B. (2015). Motives and outcomes in family business
succession planning. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 39(2), 299–312.

Gioia, D. A., Corley, K. G., & Hamilton, A. L. (2013). Seeking qualitative rigor in inductive
research: Notes on the gioia methodology. Organizational Research Methods, 16(1),
15–31.

Goemans, H. E. (2008). Which way out? The manner and consequences of losing office.
Journal of Conflict Resolution, 52(6), 771–794.

Gomulya, D., & Boeker, W. (2014). How firms respond to financial restatement: CEO
successors and external reactions. Academy of Management Journal, 57(6),
1759–1785.

González, M., Guzmán, A., Pombo, C., & Trujillo, M. A. (2015). The role of family in-
volvement on CEO turnover: Evidence from Colombian family firms. Corporate
Governance: An International Review, 23(3), 266–284.

Greene, Z., & Haber, M. (2016). Leadership competition and disagreement at party na-
tional congresses. British Journal of Political Science, 46(3), 611–632.

Haberman, H., & Danes, S. M. (2007). Father-daughter and father-son family business
management transfer comparison: Family FIRO model application. Family Business
Review, 20(2), 163–184.

Hale, H. E. (2005). Regime cycles: Democracy, autocracy, and revolution in post-soviet
Eurasia. World Politics, 58(1), 133–165.

Haleblian, J., & Rajagopalan, N. (2006). A cognitive model of CEO dismissal:
Understanding the influence of board perceptions, attributions and efficacy beliefs.
Journal of Management Studies, 43(5), 1009–1026.

Hamori, M., & Koyuncu, B. (2015). Experience matters? The impact of prior CEO ex-
perience on firm performance. Human Resource Management, 54(1), 23–44.

B. Farah, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101289

19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0545
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0545


Handler, W. C. (1994). Succession in family business: A review of the research. Family
Business Review, 7(2), 133–157.

Helwege, J., Intintoli, V. J., & Zhang, A. (2012). Voting with their feet or activism?
Institutional investors' impact on CEO turnover. Journal of Corporate Finance, 18(1),
22–37.

Henderson, A. D., & Fredrickson, J. W. (1996). Information-processing demands as a
determinant of CEO compensation. Academy of Management Journal, 39(3), 575–606.

Henderson, A. D., Miller, D., & Hambrick, D. C. (2006). How quickly do CEOs become
obsolete? Industry dynamism, CEO tenure, and company performance. Strategic
Management Journal, 27(5), 447–460.

Herbling, D. (2016). Bank CEOs' worry over term limit. Daily Nation (Online: Daily Nation).
Herron, E. S. (2011). Measuring dissent in electoral authoritarian societies: Lessons from

Azerbaijan's 2008 presidential election and 2009 referendum. Comparative Political
Studies, 44(11), 1557–1583.

Hillier, D., & McColgan, P. (2009). Firm performance and managerial succession in family
managed firms. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting, 36(3–4), 461–484.

Hoffmann, B. (2009). Charismatic authority and leadership change: Lessons from Cuba's
post-Fidel succession. International Political Science Review, 30(3), 229–248.

Horiuchi, Y., Laing, M., & Hart, P.t. (2015). Hard acts to follow: Predecessor effects on
party leader survival. Party Politics, 21(3), 357–366.

Hornstein, A. S. (2013). Corporate capital budgeting and CEO turnover. Journal of
Corporate Finance, 20, 41–58.

Inderst, R., & Mueller, H. M. (2010). CEO replacement under private information. The
Review of Financial Studies, 23(8), 2935–2969.

Investopedia (2016a). Public company. http://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/
publiccompany.asp.

Investopedia (2016b). Private company. http://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/
privatecompany.asp.

Jalalzai, F., & Krook, M. L. (2010). Beyond Hillary and Benazir: women's political lea-
dership worldwide. International Political Science Review, 31(1), 5–21.

James, E. H., Wooten, L. P., & Dushek, K. (2011). Crisis management: Informing a new
leadership research agenda. Academy of Management Annals, 5(1), 455–493.

Janjuha-Jivraj, S., & Spence, L. J. (2009). The nature of reciprocity in family firm suc-
cession. International Small Business Journal, 27(6), 702–719.

Jaskiewicz, P., Combs, J. G., & Rau, S. B. (2015). Entrepreneurial legacy: Toward a theory
of how some family firms nurture transgenerational entrepreneurship. Journal of
Business Venturing, 30(1), 29–49.

Jaskiewicz, P., Heinrichs, K., Rau, S. B., & Reay, T. (2016). To be or not to be: How family
firms manage family and commercial logics in succession. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 40(4), 781–813.

Jenter, D., & Kanaan, F. (2015). CEO turnover and relative performance evaluation.
Journal of Finance, 70(5), 2155–2184.

Jones, P. (2011). Succession and the supreme leader in Iran. Survival, 53(6), 105–126.
Jung, J. (2014). Political contestation at the top: Politics of outsider succession at US

corporations. Organization Studies, 35(5), 727–764.
Karaevli, A. (2007). Performance consequences of new CEO ‘Outsiderness’: Moderating

effects of pre- and post-succession contexts. Strategic Management Journal, 28(7),
681–706.

Karaevli, A., & Zajac, E. J. (2012). When is an outsider CEO a good choice? MIT Sloan
Management Review, 53(4), 15.

Karaevli, A., & Zajac, E. J. (2013). When do outsider CEOs generate strategic change? The
enabling role of corporate stability. Journal of Management Studies, 50(7), 1267–1294.

Kato, T., & Long, C. (2006). Executive turnover and firm performance in China. American
Economic Review, 96(2), 363–367.

Kenig, O. (2008). Democratization of party leadership selection: Do wider selectorates
produce more competitive contests? Electoral Studies, 28(2), 240–247.

Kenig, O. (2009). Classifying party leaders' selection methods in parliamentary democ-
racies. Journal of Elections, Public Opinion and Parties, 19(4), 433–447.

Kesner, I. F., & Sebora, T. C. (1994). Executive succession: Past, present & future. Journal
of Management, 20(2), 327–372.

Kokkonen, A., & Sundell, A. (2014). Delivering stability - primogeniture and autocratic
survival in European Monarchies 1000–1800. American Political Science Review,
108(2), 438–453.

Konrad, K. A., & Mui, V.-L. (2017). The prince - or better no prince? The strategic value of
appointing a successor. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 61(10), 2158–2182.

Konrad, K. A., & Skaperdas, S. (2007). Succession rules and leadership rents. Journal of
Conflict Resolution, 51(4), 622–645.

Lam, W. (2011). Dancing to two tunes: Multi-entity roles in the family business succession
process. International Small Business Journal, 29(5), 508–533.

Lambrecht, J. (2005). Multigenerational transition in family businesses: A new ex-
planatory model. Family Business Review, 18(4), 267–282.

Langley, A., & Abdallah, C. (2011). Templates and turns in qualitative studies of strategy
and management. In D. Ketchen, & D. Bergh (Vol. Eds.), Research methodology in
strategy and management: Building methodological bridges. Vol. 6. Research methodology
in strategy and management: Building methodological bridges (pp. 201–235). Bingley,
U.K: Emerald.

Lansberg, I. (1999). Succeeding generations: Realizing the dream of families in business.
Boston: Harvard Business School Press.

Lau, J., Sinnadurai, P., & Wright, S. (2009). Corporate governance and chief executive
officer dismissal following poor performance: Australian evidence. Accounting &
Finance, 49(1), 161–182.

Lee, A. S. (1991). Integrating positivist and interpretive approaches to organizational
research. Organization Science, 2(4), 342–365.

Lee, S., Matsunaga, S. R., & Park, C. W. (2012). Management forecast accuracy and CEO
turnover. The Accounting Review, 87(6), 2095–2122.

Lehmberg, D., Rowe, W. G., White, R. E., & Phillips, J. R. (2009). The GE paradox:

Competitive advantage through fungible non-firm-specific investment. Journal of
Management, 35(5), 1129–1153.

Lehn, K. M., & Zhao, M. (2006). CEO turnover after acquisitions: Are bad bidders fired?
The Journal of Finance, 61(4), 1759–1811.

Lehrer, R. (2012). Intra-party democracy and party responsiveness.West European Politics,
35(6), 1295–1319.

Chen, C., Li, Z., Su, X., & Yao, Y. (2012). Delegation and sensitivity of CEO turnover to
firm performance within business groups: Evidence from China. Journal of Accounting
& Public Policy, 31(6), 553–574.

Liang, X., Liu, Y., Wu, S., & Zhang, S. (2012). Fending knights or masked kings: Toward a
theoretical framework of interim CEO succession. Corporate Governance: The
International Journal of Business in Society, 12(3), 367–377.

Lin, W.-T., & Liu, Y. (2012). Successor characteristics, organisational slack, and change in
the degree of firm internationalisation. International Business Review, 21(1), 89–101.

Liu, C., Eubanks, D. L., & Chater, N. (2015). The weakness of strong ties: Sampling bias,
social ties, and nepotism in family business succession. Leadership Quarterly, 26(3),
419–435.

Mader, S. (2006). CEO term limits. Forbes (Online: Forbes).
Magaloni, B. 2008. Credible power-sharing and the longevity of authoritarian rule.

Comparative Political Studies, 41(4/5): 715–741.
Magnusson, P., & Boggs, D. J. (2006). International experience and CEO selection: An

empirical study. Journal of International Management, 12(1), 107–125.
Malamud, A. (2015). Social revolution or political takeover? The argentine collapse of

2001 reassessed. Latin American Perspectives, 42(1), 11–26.
Maltz, G. (2007). The case for presidential term limits. Journal of Democracy, 18(1),

128–142.
Marshall, A., McCann, L., & McColgan, P. (2014). Do banks really monitor? Evidence from

CEO succession decisions. Journal of Banking & Finance, 46, 118–131.
Marshall, J. P., Sorenson, R., Brigham, K., Wieling, E., Reifman, A., & Wampler, R. S.

(2006). The paradox for the family firm CEO: Owner age relationship to succession-
related processes and plans. Journal of Business Venturing, 21(3), 348–368.

Marsteintredet, L. (2014). Explaining variation of executive instability in presidential
regimes: Presidential interruptions in Latin America. International Political Science
Review, 35(2), 173–194.

Marsteintredet, L., & Berntzen, E. (2008). Reducing the perils of presidentialism in Latin
America through presidential interruptions. Comparative Politics, 41(1), 83–101.

Mason, R. (2010). P's Tony Hayward resigns after being ‘demonised and vilified’ in the US. The
Telegraph (Online: The Telegraph).

Matthews, N. (2016). The selection of party leaders in Northern Ireland. Parliamentary
Affairs, 69(4), 901–927.

McMullen, J. S., & Warnick, B. J. (2015). To nurture or groom? The parent-founder
succession dilemma. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 39(6), 1379–1412.

Merle, R. (2016). Wells Fargo CEO steps down in wake of sham accounts scandal. The
Washington Post (Online: The Washington Post).

Miller, K. (2005). The problem of method and the practice of management research. In D.
Ketchen, & D. Bergh (Vol. Eds.), Research methodology in strategy and management. Vol.
2. Research methodology in strategy and management (pp. 143–177). UK: Emerald.

Mobbs, S. (2013). CEOs under fire: The effects of competition from inside directors on
forced CEO turnover and CEO compensation. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis, 48(3), 669–698.

Mobbs, S., & Raheja, C. G. (2012). Internal managerial promotions: Insider incentives and
CEO succession. Journal of Corporate Finance, 18(5), 1337–1353.

Molly, V., Laveren, E., & Deloof, M. (2010). Family business succession and its impact on
financial structure and performance. Family Business Review, 23(2), 131–147.

Mooney, C. H., Semadeni, M., & Kesner, I. F. (2017). The selection of an interim CEO:
Boundary conditions and the pursuit of temporary leadership. Journal of Management,
43(2), 455–475.

Motwani, J., Levenburg, N. M., Schwarz, T. V., & Blankson, C. (2006). Succession plan-
ning in SMEs: An empirical analysis. International Small Business Journal, 24(5),
471–495.

Mount, I. (2013). The case for CEO term limits. Fortune (Online: Fortune).
Myatt, M. (2013). CEO term limits: Good soundbite – bad idea. Forbes (Online: Forbes).
Nakauchi, M., & Wiersema, M. F. (2015). Executive succession and strategic change in

Japan. Strategic Management Journal, 36(2), 298–306.
Nalepa, M., & Powell, E. J. (2016). The role of domestic opposition and international

justice regimes in peaceful transitions of power. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 60(7),
1191–1218.

O'Brien, D. Z. (2015). Rising to the top: Gender, political performance, and party lea-
dership in parliamentary democracies. American Journal of Political Science, 59(4),
1022–1039.

Oswald, S. L., & Muse, L. A. (2009). The influence of large stake family control on per-
formance: Is it agency or entrenchment? Journal of Small Business Management, 47(1),
116–135.

Ozelge, S., & Saunders, A. (2012). The role of lending banks in forced CEO turnovers.
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 44(4), 631–659.

Pan, Y., Weng, R., Xu, N., & Chan, K. C. (2018). The role of corporate philanthropy in
family firm succession: A social outreach perspective. Journal of Banking & Finance,
88, 423–441.

Pérez-González, F. (2006). Inherited control and firm performance. American Economic
Review, 96(5), 1559–1588.

Pi, L., & Lowe, J. (2011). Can a powerful CEO avoid involuntary replacement? An em-
pirical study from China. Asia Pacific Journal of Management, 28(4), 775–805.

PwC (2016). Governance insights: A focus on CEO succession. New York:
PricewaterhouseCoopershttp://www.pwc.com/us/en/governanceinsights-center/
publications/assets/pwc-ceo-successionplanning.pdf.

Quigley, T., Crossland, C., & Campbell, R. (2017). Shareholder perceptions of the

B. Farah, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101289

20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0565
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0565
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0565
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0570
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0575
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0575
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0575
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0580
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0580
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0595
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0595
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0600
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0600
http://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/publiccompany.asp
http://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/publiccompany.asp
http://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/privatecompany.asp
http://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/privatecompany.asp
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0615
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0615
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0620
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0620
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0625
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0625
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0630
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0630
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0630
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0635
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0635
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0635
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0640
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0640
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0645
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0650
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0650
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0655
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0655
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0655
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0660
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0660
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0665
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0665
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0670
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0670
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0675
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0675
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0680
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0680
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0685
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0685
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0690
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0690
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0690
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0700
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0700
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0705
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0705
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0710
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0710
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0715
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0715
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0720
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0720
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0720
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0720
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0720
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0725
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0725
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0730
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0730
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0730
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0735
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0735
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0740
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0740
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0745
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0745
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0745
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0750
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0750
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0755
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0755
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0760
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0760
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0760
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0765
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0765
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0765
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0770
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0770
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0775
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0775
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0775
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0780
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0785
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0785
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0790
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0790
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0795
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0795
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0800
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0800
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0805
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0805
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0805
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0810
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0810
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0810
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0815
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0815
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0820
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0820
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0825
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0825
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0830
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0830
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0835
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0835
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0840
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0840
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0840
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0850
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0850
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0850
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0855
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0855
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0860
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0860
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0865
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0865
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0865
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0870
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0870
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0870
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0875
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0880
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0885
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0885
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0890
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0890
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0890
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0900
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0900
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0900
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0905
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0905
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0905
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0910
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0910
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0915
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0915
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0915
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0925
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0925
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0930
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0930
http://www.pwc.com/us/en/governanceinsights-center/publications/assets/pwc-ceo-successionplanning.pdf
http://www.pwc.com/us/en/governanceinsights-center/publications/assets/pwc-ceo-successionplanning.pdf
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0940


changing impact of CEOs: Market reactions to unexpected CEO deaths, 1950-2009.
Strategic Management Journal, 38(4), 939–949.

Quigley, T. J., & Hambrick, D. C. (2012). When the former CEO stays on as board chair:
Effects on successor discretion, strategic change, and performance. Strategic
Management Journal, 33(7), 834–859.

Radnitz, S. (2012). Oil in the family: Managing presidential succession in Azerbaijan.
Democratization, 19(1), 60–77.

Rhodes, R. A., Binder, S. A., & Rockman, B. A. (Eds.). (2008). The Oxford handbook of
political institutions. Oxford University Press.

Rothaermel, F. T. (2015). Strategic management (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill
Education.

Rowe, W. G., & Morrow, J. L., Jr. (1999). A note on the dimensionality of the firm fi-
nancial performance construct using accounting, market, and subjective measures.
Revue Canadienne des Sciences de l'Administration, 16(1), 58.

Royer, S., Simons, R., Boyd, B., & Rafferty, A. (2008). Promoting family: A contingency
model of family business succession. Family Business Review, 21(1), 15–30.

Salvato, C., & Corbetta, G. (2013). Transitional leadership of advisors as a facilitator of
successors' leadership construction. Family Business Review, 26(3), 235–255.

Salvato, C., Minichilli, A., & Piccarreta, R. (2012). Faster route to the CEO suite: Nepotism
or managerial proficiency? Family Business Review, 25(2), 206–224.

Saporito, T. J., & Winum, P. (2012). Inside CEO succession: The essential guide to leadership
transition. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Sardeshmukh, S. R., & Corbett, A. C. (2011). The duality of internal and external devel-
opment of successors: Opportunity recognition in family firms. Family Business
Review, 24(2), 111–125.

Schepker, D., Kim, Y., Patel, P., Thatcher, S., & Campion, M. (2017). CEO succession,
strategic change, and post-succession performance: A meta-analysis. Leadership
Quarterly, 28(6), 701–720.

Sharma, P., & Irving, P. G. (2005). Four bases of family business successor commitment:
Antecedents and consequences. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 29(1), 13–33.

Shen, W., & Cannella, A. A. (2003). Will succession planning increase shareholder
wealth? Evidence from investor reactions to relay CEO successions. Strategic
Management Journal, 24(2), 191–198.

Somer-Topcu, Z. (2017). Agree or disagree: How do party leader changes affect the dis-
tribution of voters' perceptions. Party Politics, 23(1), 66–75.

Sonnenfeld, J. (2015). CEO exit schedules: A season to stay, a season to go. Fortune (Online:
Fortune).

Stacher, J. (2008). Egypt: The anatomy of succession. Review of African Political Economy,
35(116), 301–314.

t Hart, P., & Uhr, J. (2011). Power transitions and leadership successions in government.
In P. 't Hart, & J. Uhr (Eds.). How power changes hands: Transition and succession in
government (pp. 1–20). UK: Palgrave.

Tanaka, S. (2016). Retirement planning for dictators: What happens to outgoing dicta-
tors? International Relations of the Asia-Pacific, 16(1), 1–25.

Tatoglu, E., Kula, V., & Glaister, K. W. (2008). Succession planning in family-owned
businesses: Evidence from Turkey. International Small Business Journal, 26(2),
155–180.

The Economist (2004). Passing on the crown. The Economist, 373, 69–71.
Tian, J. J., Haleblian, J. J., & Rajagopalan, N. (2011). The effects of board human and

social capital on investor reactions to new CEO selection. Strategic Management
Journal, 32(7), 731–747.

Tideman, S. G. (2016). Gross national happiness: Lessons for sustainability leadership.
South Asian Journal of Global Business Research, 5(2), 190–213.

Ting, H.-I. (2013). CEO turnover and shareholder wealth: Evidence from CEO power in
Taiwan. Journal of Business Research, 66(12), 2466–2472.

Tranfield, D., Denyer, D., & Smart, P. (2003). Towards a methodology for developing
evidence-informed management knowledge by means of systematic review. British
Journal of Management, 14(3), 207–222.

Treanor, W. M. (2010). Introduction: The adequacy of the presidential succession system
in the 21st century: Filling the gaps and clarifying the ambiguities in constitutional
and extraconstitutional arrangements. Fordham Law Review, 79(3), 775–779.

Trostel, A. O., & Nichols, M. L. (1982). Privately-held and publicly-held companies: A
comparison of strategic choices and management processes. Academy of Management
Journal, 25(1), 47–62.

Tsai, W.-H., Kuo, Y.-C., & Hung, J.-H. (2009). Corporate diversification and CEO turnover
in family businesses: Self-entrenchment or risk reduction? Small Business Economics,
32(1), 57–76.

Tsoulouhas, T., Knoeber, C. R., & Agrawal, A. (2007). Contests to become CEO:
Incentives, selection and handicaps. Economic Theory, 30(2), 195–221.

Vancil, R. F. (1987). Passing the baton: Managing the process of CEO succession. Boston, MA:
Harvard Business School Press.

Venter, E., Boshoff, C., & Maas, G. (2005). The influence of successor-related factors on
the succession process in small and medium-sized family businesses. Family Business

Review, 18(4), 283–303.
Vera, C. F., & Dean, M. A. (2005). An examination of the challenges daughters face in

family business succession. Family Business Review, 18(4), 321–345.
Wang, H., Zhao, S., & Chen, G. (2017). Firm-specific knowledge assets and employment

arrangements: Evidence from CEO compensation design and CEO dismissal. Strategic
Management Journal, 38(9), 1875–1894.

Wauters, B. (2014). Democratising party leadership selection in Belgium: Motivations and
decision makers. Political Studies, 62(S1), 61–80.

Whitehead, C. K. (2011). Why not a CEO term limit? Boston University Law Review, 91(3),
1263–1288.

Wiersema, M. F., Nishimura, Y., & Suzuki, K. (2018). Executive succession: The im-
portance of social capital in CEO appointments. Strategic Management Journal, 39,
1473–1495.

Wiersema, M. F., & Zhang, Y. (2011). CEO dismissal: The role of investment analysts.
Strategic Management Journal, 32(11), 1161–1182.

Wowak, A., Gomez-Mejia, L., & Steinbach, A. (2017). Inducements and motives at the top:
A holistic perspective on the drivers of executive behavior. Academy of Management
Annals, 11(2), 669–702.

Wowak, A., Hambrick, D., & Henderson, A. (2011). Do CEOs encounter within-tenure
settling up? A multiperiod perspective on executive pay and dismissal. Academy of
Management Journal, 54(4), 719–739.

Yan, J., & Sorenson, R. (2006). The effect of Confucian values on succession in family
business. Family Business Review, 19(3), 235–250.

Yermack, D. (2006). Golden handshakes: Separation pay for retired and dismissed CEOs.
Journal of Accounting and Economics, 41(3), 237–256.

You, J., & Du, G. (2012). Are political connections a blessing or a curse? Evidence from
CEO turnover in China. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 20(2),
179–194.

Zeng, J. (2013). What matters most in selecting top Chinese leaders? A qualitative
comparative analysis. Journal of Chinese Political Science, 18(3), 223–239.

Zhang, Y. (2006). The presence of a separate COO/president and its impact on strategic
change and CEO dismissal. Strategic Management Journal, 27(3), 283–300.

Zhang, Y. (2008). Information asymmetry and the dismissal of newly appointed CEOs: An
empirical investigation. Strategic Management Journal, 29(8), 859–872.

Zhang, Y., & Qu, H. (2016). The impact of CEO succession with gender change on firm
performance and successor early departure: Evidence from China's publicly listed
companies in 1997–2010. Academy of Management Journal, 59(5), 1845–1868.

Zhang, Y., & Rajagopalan, N. (2010). Once an outsider, always an outsider? CEO origin,
strategic change, and firm performance. Strategic Management Journal, 31(3),
334–346.

Zhu, D., & Shen, W. (2016). Why do some outside successions fare better than others? The
role of outside CEOs' prior experience with board diversity. Strategic Management
Journal, 37(13), 2695–2708.

Further reading

Bach, L., & Serrano-Velarde, N. (2015). CEO identity and labor contracts: Evidence from
CEO transitions. Journal of Corporate Finance, 33(4), 227–242.

Bennedsen, M., Fan, J. P., Jian, M., & Yeh, Y.-H. (2015). The family business map:
Framework, selective survey, and evidence from Chinese family firm succession.
Journal of Corporate Finance, 33(4), 212–226.

Calabrò, A., Minichilli, A., Amore, M. D., & Brogi, M. (2017). The courage to choose!
Primogeniture and leadership succession in family firms. Strategic Management
Journal, 37(7), 2014–2035.

Chen, X., Cheng, Q., & Dai, Z. (2013). Family ownership and CEO turnovers.
Contemporary Accounting Research, 30(3), 1166–1190.

Dwivedi, P., Joshi, A., & Misangyi, V. F. (2018). Gender-inclusive gatekeeping: How
(mostly male) predecessors influence the success of female CEOs. Academy of
Management Journal, 61(2), 379–404.

Eklund, J., Palmberg, J., & Wiberg, D. (2013). Inherited corporate control and returns on
investment. Small Business Economics, 41(2), 419–431.

Minichilli, A., Nordqvist, M., Corbetta, G., & Amore, M. D. (2014). CEO succession me-
chanisms, organizational context, and performance: A socio-emotional wealth per-
spective on family-controlled firms. Journal of Management Studies, 51(7),
1153–1179.

Tsai, W.-H., Hung, J.-H., Kuo, Y.-C., & Kuo, L. (2006). CEO tenure in Taiwanese family
and nonfamily firms: An agency theory perspective. Family Business Review, 19(1),
11–28.

Yoo, S. S., Schenkel, M. T., & Kim, J. (2014). Examining the impact of inherited succession
identity on family firm performance. Journal of Small Business Management, 52(2),
246–265.

B. Farah, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101289

21

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0940
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0940
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0945
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0945
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0945
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0950
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0950
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0955
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0955
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0965
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0965
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0970
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0970
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0970
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0975
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0975
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0980
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0980
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0985
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0985
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0990
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0990
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0995
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0995
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0995
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1000
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1000
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1000
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0845
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0845
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0845
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf0845
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30715-4/rf1165


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

The Leadership Quarterly

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua

Leading day-to-day: A review of the daily causes and consequences of
leadership behaviors☆

Thomas K. Kelemena,⁎,1, Samuel H. Matthewsb,1, Kimberley Breevaartc

a Division of Management & International Business, Price College of Business, University of Oklahoma, 307 W. Brooks - Rm. 206, Norman, OK 73019-0450, United States
of America
b College of Business Administration, University of Northern Iowa, 244 Curris Business Bldg., Cedar Falls, IA 50614-0123, United States of America
c Department of Work and Organizational Psychology, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Burgemeester Oudlaan 50, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands

A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords:
Review
ESM
Leadership
Daily diary
Daily leadership

A B S T R A C T

A recent trend in leadership research is to explore the daily causes and consequences of leadership behaviors. As
this type of research has grown dramatically in the past several years, we seek to provide a systematic review of
existing empirical research that has used a daily ESM study design to examine the leadership process. In this
review, we reflect on the unique and important benefits a daily perspective on leadership provides for leadership
research. We also provide a systematic review of the existing research on daily leadership, discuss the metho-
dological and theoretical aspects of the studies identified in the review, and highlight the important findings of
this research. Finally, we conclude by drawing upon the reviewed articles to provide recommendations for future
scholarly work. Specifically, we give recommendations that will both broaden scholars' understanding of the
daily leadership process as well as deepen understanding.

Every workday, leaders are responsible for the performance and
well-being of their followers, and the ways in which leaders interact
with their followers may differ from day to day or even within the day.
For example, research shows that ethical behavior – such as role-
modeling ethical behaviors to followers – drains leaders' ego resources,
which increases the likelihood that they will behave more abusively
towards their followers the next day (Lin, Ma, & Johnson, 2016). This
and other studies show that leadership is a daily and fluctuating phe-
nomenon. Prior scholarly work in the leadership field has primarily
explored the consequences of leaders' general behavioral patterns on
follower outcomes (e.g., some leaders are generally more abusive than
others, and how does that affect followers; Tepper, Simon, & Park,
2017). Recently, however, leadership researchers have begun to ex-
plore the dynamics of daily leadership behaviors (e.g., some leaders
were particularly abusive today, and how does that affect followers;
Vogel & Mitchell, 2017). This daily perspective to understand leader-
ship has grown rapidly in the past few years, refining our understanding
of leadership, expanding our understanding of the daily consequences
of leadership behaviors, and extending our understanding of the im-
mediate origins of leadership behaviors.

The behaviors of all individuals can be explored as general patterns
of consistent actions in a trait-like fashion (e.g., Jane is generally
helpful), but can also be examined at specific moments in time in a
state-like fashion (e.g., Jane was not helpful today). Likewise, leader-
ship behaviors, such as transformational or abusive leader behaviors,
can be examined as a general pattern of behavior (e.g., to what extent
does your leader inspire you overall?) or as a behavior that fluctuates
within short time periods (e.g., did your leader inspire you this
morning?). Previous research supports this idea, showing that some
leaders are more transformational than others (e.g., Bass, Avolio, Jung,
& Berson, 2003; Howell & Avolio, 1993) and that the use of transfor-
mational leadership often fluctuates within the same leader on a daily
basis (e.g., Breevaart et al., 2014; Tims, Bakker, & Xanthopoulou,
2011). Prior research has also highlighted how followers' daily reports
of a leader's behavior are significantly different from their reports of the
same leader's general leadership behavior (Hoption, 2016).

In this paper, we look to review existing research that examines the
daily causes and consequences of leadership. In doing so, we build on
prior reviews that have discussed daily leadership (e.g., McClean,
Barnes, Courtright, & Johnson, in press; Ohly & Gochmann, 2017).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101344
Received 14 November 2018; Received in revised form 22 October 2019; Accepted 1 November 2019

☆ The authors would like to thank David Day and the anonymous reviewers for their constructive feedback and suggestions.
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: thomas.kelemen@ou.edu (T.K. Kelemen), samuel.matthews@uni.edu (S.H. Matthews), breevaart@essb.eur.nl (K. Breevaart).

1 Co-first author.

The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101344

Available online 29 November 2019
1048-9843/ © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

T

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/10489843
https://www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101344
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101344
mailto:thomas.kelemen@ou.edu
mailto:samuel.matthews@uni.edu
mailto:breevaart@essb.eur.nl
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101344
http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101344&domain=pdf


First, our review extends the work by McClean et al. (in press)2 that
reviewed the broader research of changing leadership. While McClean
et al. (in press) included a wider range of changing leadership behaviors
such as longer-term leader behavioral shifts and leader behavioral
growth and decay, we solely focus on daily behaviors. As a con-
sequence, our review is more comprehensive of the daily leadership
literature and highlights unique elements and patterns (e.g., methodo-
logical practices, theoretical perspectives, types of leader behaviors
studied). This allows us to more precisely assess both the strengths and
weaknesses in current research. It also allows us to provide more de-
tailed suggestions for future research. Second, our review builds on
Ohly and Gochmann's (2017) review of daily leadership, which pri-
marily focused on specifying methodological best practices for daily
leadership research. Our review does not provide specific methodolo-
gical best practices per se, but rather assesses the state of the science in
daily leadership to see how it meets current best practices already
provided.

Thus, the aim of this manuscript is to review and evaluate previous
research examining the daily causes and consequences of leadership
behaviors. In doing this, we hope to inform scholars on how previous
daily studies of leadership have (and have not) utilized their study
designs to theoretically advance leadership knowledge. We believe that
by highlighting what has been done in daily leadership studies, we can
spark future leadership inquiry by helping scholars look at leadership
research through a slightly different lens. In what follows, we first re-
flect on the value added by studying leadership in a daily fashion. Then,
based on our systematic review of the literature, we review the existing
empirical research conducted by scholars that has explored leadership
on a daily basis. We do this by first summarizing the theories used by
articles in our review; second, analyzing the methods used in the arti-
cles in our review; and, third reviewing the articles based on the be-
haviors studied. Finally, in our conclusion, we discuss areas for future
research based on our review. We provide suggestions that will push the
field forward and establish a road map for further inquiry in daily
leadership research.

Importance of examining daily leadership

There are at least three important theoretical and methodological
advantages to study daily leadership relations. The first is that scholars
are able to examine phenomena and test leadership theories at a within-
person level (McCormick, Reeves, Downes, Li, & Ilies, in press). The
within-person approach to leadership allows researchers to answer
unique research questions that complement the existing nomological
network surrounding leadership with novel information on the work-
ings of leadership. Second, understanding daily leadership allows re-
searchers to get an in-depth look at the short term processes of lea-
dership (i.e., the proximal causes and consequences of leadership). It
also provides insight into how leadership behaviors unfold over short
spans of time (i.e., during the day or from one day to the next). Third, it
allows researchers to analyze leadership behaviors in their natural
context. Studying daily life of any sort, be it leadership, student life, or
parenting, allows researchers to “capture life as it is lived” (Bolger,
Davis, & Rafaeli, 2003). Leadership is a complex process, and thus,
studying leadership in a daily fashion is critical to fully understand it as
it gives unique insight that cannot be easily captured in other ways.
Below, we describe each of these three benefits in more detail.

Within-person approach to leadership

Existing leadership research primarily focuses on leadership at a
between-person level, studying differences in general patterns of

behaviors between different leaders. These studies provide valuable
insights to select individuals for a leadership position. For example,
previous research has shown that individuals who score highly on
agreeableness and honesty-humility scales are less likely to behave
abusively towards their followers (Breevaart & de Vries, 2017). But
daily studies on leadership provide unique information to scholars by
allowing researchers to explore leadership at another level of analysis –
the within-person level – on a daily basis. Even personality, a mean-
ingful way to explain differences between individuals, has been shown
to be worth studying on a daily basis to understand within-person re-
lationships (e.g., Fleeson, 2001; Fleeson & Noftle, 2011). And although
there are other notable types of within-person studies focusing on
leader development over time (e.g., Giambatista, 2004; Kalish & Luria,
2016; Miscenko, Guenter, & Day, 2017) or following interventions or
changes (e.g., Day & Sin, 2011; Seifert & Yukl, 2010), daily studies are
different with their focus on short-term (i.e., daily) within-person re-
lationships in leadership.

Daily within-person leadership studies both challenge the way we
view leadership (Dalal, Bhave, & Fiset, 2014) and show how leadership
relations exist at multiple levels of analysis. Daily within-persons stu-
dies of leadership can show how leader relations that are non-existent
at the between-person level exist at a within-person level. For example,
at the between-person level, leader abusive behaviors and leader be-
haviors of consideration and structure initiation are likely to be nega-
tively correlated. However, on a within-person, daily level they have
been found to positively relate to each other (*Liao, Yam, Johnson, Liu,
& Song, 2018). In a related example, Breevaart et al. (2014) showed
that leaders can be transformational, rewarding, and controlling all on
the same day. Thus, daily within-person leadership research can change
and challenge preconceived relations in leadership.

Daily studies also extend leadership research by showing that re-
lations exist at multiple levels of analysis. This extends theories of
leadership by showing that both general leadership behaviors and daily
leadership behaviors have implications for leader and follower ante-
cedents and outcomes. Within-person studies demonstrate the need for
leaders to behave constructively not only in general but also on a daily
basis. For example, transformational leadership at the between-person
level of analysis has been found to increase employee job engagement
(Zhu, Avolio, & Walumbwa, 2009); daily studies have shown that this
relationship also exists at a within-person level of analysis (Breevaart
et al., 2014; Tims et al., 2011).

Short-term processes of leadership

Another theoretical and methodological advantage of daily studies
of leadership is that they allow researchers to study the complexity of
leadership processes as they unfold from one day or situation to the
next. Scholars can examine what daily situations trigger different types
of constructive (e.g., transformational or servant) and destructive (e.g.,
abusive or tyrannical) leadership behaviors and better explore the
proximal consequences of these leader behaviors. This helps give
scholars a deeper and more nuanced view of short-term relationships in
leadership. Knowledge of these proximal situational triggers of lea-
dership behaviors have theoretical implications and provide important
information to optimize the practice of leadership. For example, Barnes,
Lucianetti, Bhave, and Christian (2015) asked leaders when they woke
up to indicate how many hours they slept and how well they slept. They
found that regardless of the hours of sleep, leaders who reported lower
sleep quality in the morning (e.g., waking up throughout the night) also
reported having depleted egos, which caused their followers to report
they were more abusive that day. Thus, if sleep affects the use of
abusive leadership behaviors, organizations could decide to grant their
leaders a day off after a night of working overtime, or leaders them-
selves may decide to work from home the next day.

Daily studies also allow scholars to use more specific variables to
test theories and thus uniquely explore the leadership process. Studies

2 Of the 74 articles in our review, only 17 were reviewed in the McClean et al.
(in press) article.

T.K. Kelemen, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101344

2



that use precise, specific variables complement more traditional studies
of leadership by allowing scholars to measure and examine leadership
processes in different ways. For example, Rosen et al. (2019) explored
how daily email demands, instead of just general work demands, in the
morning influenced leader behaviors during the day. Similarly, Stocker,
Jacobshagen, Krings, Pfister, and Semmer (2014) examined how daily
leader appreciation, instead of just general leader support, leads to
enhanced follower outcomes for the day. Finally, Ford, Wang, Jin, and
Eisenberger (2018) explored how daily leader support increased fol-
lower daily gratitude – rather than just positive affect – which increased
follower daily organizational citizenship behavior (OCB) and decreased
follower counterproductive work behaviors (CWB). Thus, daily studies
allow researchers to get deeper insights into specific aspects of daily life
and how they relate to the process of leadership.

Daily studies also provide important information on how time af-
fects short-term leadership processes. Daily studies can examine how
long the effects of leadership behaviors last for followers and leaders.
They can also show how the timing of leadership behaviors is im-
portant. For example, Qin, Huang, Johnson, Hu, and Ju (2018) found
that leader daily abusive behaviors increased leader work engagement
the next day but that it had a negative effect on leader work engage-
ment after several days. In general, daily studies can incorporate time
into leadership research to provide further information into the short-
term process of leadership.

Leadership in its natural context

Finally, daily studies of leadership often examine leadership in its
natural context rather than in a special environment such as a labora-
tory setting. Measuring behaviors as they naturally and spontaneously
occur is what makes the study of daily behaviors fundamentally dif-
ferent from both laboratory and field studies that use global self-reports
(i.e., general experiences or stable trait-like differences between
people). Gathering contextualized information is one of the major ad-
vantages of daily studies (Reis, 2012). For example, employees are
often asked to rate their leader's behavior when they are at work, rather
than in a lab or at home. Studying behaviors and feelings in their
natural context is important because the context plays an important
role in eliciting these behaviors and feelings. Additionally, feelings and
emotions are transient in nature (Robinson & Clore, 2002). When your
leader's behavior elicits certain feelings, these feelings may have dis-
appeared by the time you got home, or they may have been affected by
other experiences. So, the closer the measure is to the actual experience,
the better.

In addition, the embeddedness of daily studies in the natural context
is also relevant when studying leadership behaviors that cannot be
studied in the lab for ethical or practical reasons. Due to ethical con-
cerns, daily studies become of paramount importance for abusive leader
behaviors or other types of destructive leadership behaviors. Because it
would be unethical to experimentally manipulate destructive leader-
ship behaviors such as publicly ridiculing someone or blaming someone
for something (s)he did not do, these behaviors can be studied as they
naturally occur during the day. In addition, from an external validity
standpoint, leadership can be difficult to authentically create in a la-
boratory setting, which makes it uniquely important to study leadership
in the field. While laboratory studies of leader behaviors can provide
important insight into leadership (e.g., Koning & Van Kleef, 2015; Van
Kleef et al., 2009; Visser, van Knippenberg, Van Kleef, & Wisse, 2013),
an encounter with an actor, a pre-recorded video, or written description
of a leader carries ecological validity limitations. For these reasons,
leadership derives distinct advantages from being studied in a daily
fashion.

Review process

Experience sampling methodology

Our review focuses on leadership studies that utilized experience
sampling methodology (ESM) to measure daily leadership behaviors,
which we refer to as “daily leadership studies.” ESM is a methodological
approach that allows researchers to better capture real-time experi-
ences (Uy, Foo, & Aguinis, 2010). That is, rather than having partici-
pants reflect back on experiences and feelings that happened in the
past, ESM allows scholars to measure experiences and feelings as they
occur (Fisher & To, 2012). There are three types of ESM methods (Reis
& Gable, 2000; Uy et al., 2010; Wheeler & Reis, 1991). The first is
collecting data at a specified interval (e.g., at the end of a workday) is
called interval-contingent sampling. This method is one of the most
common ways of employing ESM in leadership studies (see Barnes
et al., 2015, Courtright, Gardner, Smith, McCormick, & Colbert, 2016,
and Lanaj, Foulk, & Erez, 2019 for examples). It is used to study phe-
nomena at fixed times, for example at 09:00 AM to report about one's
sleep that night and at 06:00 PM to report about one's workday. Because
this type of sampling introduces some type of memory bias (e.g., re-
flecting on the entire workday), it is best used to measure experiences
and behaviors that are somewhat resistant to memory bias.

The second type of ESM invites participants to input data every time
they are notified by the researchers, usually by email or through an
electronic notification device (see Bono, Foldes, Vinson, & Muros, 2007
for an example). This type of sampling is called signal-contingent
sampling and can be used to measure ongoing experiences that are
likely affected by the predictability of measurement and memory bias.
Participants are asked to report their current experiences when they
receive a signal. This type of sampling is also referred to as experience
sampling. The third type of ESM collects data at an event level (see
Meier & Gross, 2015, Stocker et al., 2014, and Wijewardena, Härtel, &
Samaratunge, 2017 for examples), and is called event-based sampling.
In this type of design, participants are asked to respond to a survey
every time a particular event or interaction occurs. By having partici-
pants respond immediately following the event in question, researchers
can minimize recall bias. Event-based sampling is especially useful to
capture rare phenomena because participants only report on their ex-
periences when a specified event happens (Uy et al., 2010). Collec-
tively, these three ways of conducting ESM studies give scholars a
variety of ways to design their studies depending on their research
questions.

Systematic review

We conducted our search for empirical leadership studies by
searching in EBSCO and Web of Science. We focused our search on
studies that examined leadership behaviors (i.e., transformational,
ethical) – either measured by the leader or follower. To identify articles
relevant to our review we searched for leader*, manager*, or supervis* as
well as one of the following keywords: daily report, experience-sampling,
event sampling, diary stud*, or daily diary. In our search process, we
confirmed that the articles aligned with the aim of the review by 1)
including leadership behaviors, 2) measuring variables at the daily
level, and 3) including a dependent variable (i.e., we excluded studies
that simply measured the frequency of different types of leader beha-
viors but did not measure a dependent variable). Through this search
process, we found 72 articles. We then added two articles (Lanaj &
Jennings, 2019; Liao, Liu, Li, & Song, 2018) of which we were aware,
bringing our total to 74 articles. Below, in Table 1, we provide a
summary of each article included in our review. We first summarize the
theories and models used in the articles, then provide a synthesis of the
methodological approaches used, and finally review the articles based
on leadership behavior studied.

T.K. Kelemen, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101344

3



Table 1
Articles identified for review and summaries.

Authors (year) Leadership behavior Theoretical framework Data source Data collection frequency &
duration

Key findings

Almeida et al. (2016) Supportive Work-home resource model 131 followers Once a day for 8 days General supportive leadership moderates the relationship
between follower work-family conflict to follower negative
affect. Daily supportive leadership also moderated the relation
between follower work-family conflict to nighttime cortisol
levels.

Amabile, Schatzel, Moneta, and Kramer
(2004)

Supportive Componential theory of
creativity

139 followers Once a day during a project
lifespan (8–37weeks)

A leader's daily behaviors affect followers' daily perceptions
and feelings, which then affected peer-rated follower
creativity.

Barnes et al. (2015) Abusive Ego depletion theory 99 leaders & 261 followers Once a day for 10 days A lack of quality sleep influences leaders to engage in daily
abusive supervision behaviors due to ego depletion, which
then leads to decreased work unit engagement.

Beattie and Griffin (2014) Supportive Job demands-resources theory 130 followers Eight times over 4 weeks Supportive leadership minimizes the positive relationship
between daily incivility and daily stress.

Blanco-Donoso, Garrosa, Demerouti, and
Moreno-Jiménez (2017)

Supportive Conservation of resources theory 74 followers Twice a day for 5 days The authors did not find that daily supervisor support buffered
the negative effect daily difficulties to regulate emotions at
work had on emotional exhaustion, fatigue, and negative
affect.

Bono et al. (2007) Transformational & exchange Self-determination theory 54 followers Four times a day for 10 days Followers experience fewer positive emotions when
interacting with their leader. Further, followers with a leader
high in transformational leadership experience more positive
emotions during the day. Leader transformational leadership
also moderates the daily relation between follower emotion
regulation and job satisfaction but not the daily relation
between follower emotion regulation and job stress.

Bormann (2017) Ethical & abusive Social learning theory 241 followers Once a day for 5 days Daily ethical leadership leads to follower engagement which
then increased follower helping. Further, the meditated
relationship is moderated by the previous day's abusive
leadership behaviors.

Breevaart and Bakker (2018) Transformational Job demands-resources theory 271 followers Once a day for 10 days Daily challenge demands has a positive relationship with work
engagement on the days that transformational leadership was
high. Daily hindrance demands has a negative relationship
with work engagement on days when transformational
leadership was low.

Breevaart et al. (2014) Transformational, contingent
reward, & MBE

Transformational leadership
theory

61 followers Once a day for 34 days Daily transformational leadership and contingent reward
positively affects followers' daily sense of work of a favorable
work environment and work engagement, while MBE
decreases feelings of a favorable work environment.

Butts, Becker, and Boswell (2015) Abusive Affective events theory 341 followers Once a day for 7 days The relationship between the affective tone of electronic
communication and anger is strongest when communication is
from a leader and the leader is high in abusive supervision.

Christensen-Salem, Kinicki, Zhang, and
Walumbwa (2018)

Supportive Affective events theory 63 followers Once a day for 10 days Leader developmental feedback leads to positive affect via
feedback acceptance, which then increases creativity on a
within-person basis.

Courtright et al. (2016) Abusive Resource drain theory 92 leaders Once a day for 10 days Family work conflict leads to increases in abusive supervision
the next day, via ego depletion.

Derks, van Duin, Tims, and Bakker (2015) Expectations Boundary theory 100 followers Once a day for 4 days When leaders expect followers to be online after work hours,
the relationship between daily smartphone use and daily
work-home interference is strengthened.

Diebig, Bormann, and Rowold (2017) Transformational No explicit model or theory 205 followers Once a day for 5 days Leader transformational leadership behaviors increase team
cooperation which then decreases follower stress. Type of
communication moderates this relationship.

(continued on next page)

T
.K
.
K
elem

en,
et

al.
The Leadership Q

uarterly 31 (2020) 101344

4



Table 1 (continued)

Authors (year) Leadership behavior Theoretical framework Data source Data collection frequency &
duration

Key findings

Dollard and Idris (2017) Supportive Job demands-resources theory 109 followers Once a day for 5 days Espoused psychological safety climate leads to daily enacted
leader support, which then leads to an increase in work
engagement. Espoused psychological safety climate influences
the daily fluctuation of enacted leader support. Daily leader
support also strengthens the negative relation between
espoused psychological safety and emotional exhaustion.

Dong, Liao, Chuang, Zhou, and Campbell
(2015)

Empowering Regulatory focus theory 380 followers Ten random work events over
4 weeks

Empowering leadership strengthens the relationship between
follower state promotion focus and follower creativity.
Empowering leadership also strengthens the indirect effect
between customer empowering behavior to employee
creativity via state promotion focus.

Ellis, Bauer, Erdogan, and Truxillo (2018) Exchange No explicit model or theory 129 followers Once a day for 5 days Leader member exchange quality increases followers' sense of
belonging which then enhances their vigor and decreases their
emotional exhaustion. Leader member exchange relationships
also affect follower next day emotional exhaustion.

Ford et al. (2018) Helping & justice Affective events theory 54 followers Once a day for 10 days Daily leader helping leads to more episodic gratitude towards
the organization, which increases the prevalence of OCBs and
decreased the prevalence of CWBs. Leader interactional justice
leads to a decrease in episodic anger towards the organization,
which decreases the prevalence of CWBs.

Foulk, Lanaj, Tu, Erez, and Archambeau
(2018)

Abusive Social distance theory of power &
Consent-based theory of power

108 leaders Thrice a day for 10 days Psychological power leads to leader abusive behaviors which
then leads to decreases in need fulfillment and relaxation.

Germeys and De Gieter (2017) Supportive Conservation of resources theory 50 followers Once a day for 10 days The positive relationship between daily home-work conflict
and daily CWB is minimized when employees experience high
levels of family-support from their leader.

Goh, Ilies, and Wilson (2015) Supportive Conservation of resources theory 135 followers Twice a day for 5 days High levels of leader support minimize the negative
relationship between daily workload and daily work-family
conflict.

Hetland, Hetland, Bakker, and Demerouti
(2018)

Transformational Transformational leadership
theory

65 followers Once a day for 5 days Daily transformational leadership leads to an increase in
positive job attitudes through an increase in fulfillment of
psychological needs.

Hetland et al. (2018) Transformational Job demands-resources theory 107 followers Once a day for 5 days Daily transformational leadership behaviors lead to follower's
daily job crafting. Promotion focus moderated this relation.

Johnson, Lanaj, and Barnes (2014) Justice Ego depletion theory 79 leaders Twice a day for 10 days Daily procedural justice behaviors are depleting for leaders
and indirectly reduce leader OCB. Daily interactional justice
behaviors are not depleting for leaders and indirectly increase
leader OCB.

Johnson, Venus, Lanaj, Mao, and Chang
(2012)

Transformational,
consideration & abusive

Social identity theory 53 leaders & 86 co-workers
or followers

Once a day for 15 days Leaders with a collective identity have higher mean levels of
transformational leadership behaviors and lower variance in
transformational leadership behaviors. Leaders with an
individual identity have higher mean levels of abusive
supervision and lower variance in abusive supervision.

Jones and Johnston (2012) Supportive No explicit model or theory 171 followers Once a shift for 3 shifts Nurses who received leader support after a negative incident
are more likely to have a decrease in positive affect following
the negative incident.

Jones and Johnston (2013) Supportive No explicit model or theory 171 followers Once a shift for 3 shifts The authors did not find that daily leader support interacted
with negative affect to influence quality of care.

Judge, Scott, and Ilies (2006) Justice Affective events theory 64 followers Once a day for 15 days On days that followers perceive their leader displayed higher
levels of interpersonal justice, followers feel more job
satisfaction and less state hostility

Kelloway, Weigand, McKee, and Das
(2013)

Positive & transformational Broaden & build theory 26 followers Six times over a three-week
period

Positive leadership and transformational leadership increase
followers' daily positive affect.

(continued on next page)

T
.K
.
K
elem

en,
et

al.
The Leadership Q

uarterly 31 (2020) 101344

5



Table 1 (continued)

Authors (year) Leadership behavior Theoretical framework Data source Data collection frequency &
duration

Key findings

Kudesia and Reina (2019) Leader trustworthiness No explicit model or theory 201 followers Thrice a day for 8 days Specific instances of interactions with trustworthy leaders
were not significantly associated with within-person changes
in mindfulness.

Kuonath, Specht, Kühnel, Pachler, and
Frey (2017)

Transformational Affective events theory 97 followers Once a day for 5 days Daily transformational leadership leads to an increase in
followers' personal initiative.

Lam, Lee, and Sui (2019) Voice reception Social judgement theory 53 followers & 33 leaders Every time an employee used
voice towards his/her
manager for 4 weeks

Voice directness was positively related to leader endorsement,
but only for individuals who had high voice credibility.

Lanaj and Jennings (2019) Helping Affective events theory 43 leaders & their followers Twice a day for 15 days for
leaders; once a day for 15 days
for followers

Leaders experienced more negative affect on days that they
helped followers with personal problems. Also, followers rated
their leaders as less engaged on days that they had helped
them with personal problems.

Lanaj et al. (2019) Self-reflection Cognitive energetic theory &
leader identity theory

65 leaders Thrice a day for 10 days Leader self-reflection behaviors decreased leader depletion
which increased leader engagement. This then leads to both
leader prosocial impact and clout.

Lanaj, Johnson, and Lee (2016) Transformational,
transactional

Affective events theory & self-
determination theory

50 leaders (Study 1) & 47
leaders (Study 2)

Twice a day for 15 days (both
studies)

Daily engagement of transformational leadership increases
leader positive affect and decreases negative affect.

Lavy, Littman-Ovadia, and Boiman-
Meshita (2017)

Supportive No explicit model or theory 120 followers Once a day for 10 days Daily supervisor support significantly influenced the amount
employees used their strengths on the following day. Daily
colleague support did not significantly predict following-day
use of strengths.

Li, Barnes, Yam, Guarana, and Wang (in
press)

Voice reception Ego depletion theory 62 leaders Once a day for 10 days Leaders are less likely to accept employee voice when they are
more depleted.

Liao et al. (2018) Abusive Moral licensing/ cleansing theory 31 leaders and 72 followers
(Study 1) & 68 leader-
follower dyads (Study 2)

Twice a day for 10 days (both
studies)

Daily abusive supervision leads to guilt and perceived loss of
moral credits, which leads to constructive leader behavior.

*Liao et al., 2018 Exchange Social exchange theory 73 followers Event-based sampling over
two weeks

Resource contribution surplus in an exchange episode
increases state work engagement and leads to an increase in
member resource contribution in the next exchange episode.
High LMX relationships attenuate this effect.

Liu et al. (2015) Supportive Self-regulation theory 125 followers Four times a day for 15 days Perceived leader family support minimizes the effect of daily
family-to-work conflict on displaced aggression towards
leaders, coworkers, and family members.

Matta, Erol-Korkmaz, Johnson, and
Biçaksiz (2014)

Exchange Affective events theory 50 followers Once a day for 10 days Negative daily work events are associated with followers'
negative emotional reactions and subsequent CWB. Of the
negative daily work events, negative interactions with
supervisors generally lead to the strongest negative emotional
reactions.

Matta, Scott, Colquitt, Koopman, and
Passantino (2017)

Justice displays Uncertainty management theory 97 leader-follower dyads Once a day for 15 days Justice variability displayed by leaders leads to more stress for
followers. Justice variability also exacerbates the relationship
between workplace uncertainty and stress. Leaders with more
self-control show less justice variability.

Meier and Gross (2015) Incivility Self-control strength model 116 followers Every time an event occurred
over two weeks

Followers exhibit incivility towards their supervision in
response to incivility, but only when the incivility of the
leader recently occurred that day.

Myrden and Kelloway (2015) Transformational Service-profit chain model 29 followers, 592 customers Once a day for 5 days Daily transformational leadership increases employee job
satisfaction and engagement. Increases in job satisfaction and
engagement subsequently positively impact customer
perceptions of quality, customer satisfaction, and customer
loyalty intentions.

Nielsen and Cleal (2010) Leader daily tasks Flow theory 58 leaders Randomly asked to respond
about 8 times per day for
10 days

Engaging in planning, problem-solving, and evaluation tasks
was positively related to experiencing flow at work.

(continued on next page)

T
.K
.
K
elem

en,
et

al.
The Leadership Q

uarterly 31 (2020) 101344

6



Table 1 (continued)

Authors (year) Leadership behavior Theoretical framework Data source Data collection frequency &
duration

Key findings

Nielsen and Cleal (2011) Transformational No explicit model or theory 58 leaders Randomly asked to respond
about 8 times per day for
10 days

Information sharing, brainstorming, planning, problem-
solving, discussion, and evaluation are situations that predict
transformational leadership behavior.

Pluut, Ilies, Curşeu, and Liu (2018) Supportive Work-home resources model 112 followers Twice a day for 9 days Leader support weakens the positive effect of workload on
emotional exhaustion.

Qin et al. (2018) Abusive Conservation of resources theory 72 leaders Twice a day for 10 days Daily abusive supervision leads to improved recovery levels.
However, these benefits are only short-lived.

Rodríguez-Carvajal, Herrero, van
Dierendonck, de Rivas, and Moreno-
Jiménez (2019)

Servant Broaden & build theory 126 followers Thrice a day for 5 days Daily servant leadership led to an increase in next-day worker
goal attainment through helping employees feel more positive
about the meaning of life and by helping increase their vitality
the next morning.

Rosen et al. (2019) Transformational & initiating
structure

Self-regulation Theory 48 leaders Twice a day for 10 days Leaders' daily email demands negatively affect goal progress.
For leaders with low self-control, a decrease in goal progress
then leads to a decrease in transformational and structure
initiating behaviors.

Schilpzand, Houston III, and Cho (2018) Empowering Model of proactive motivation 98 followers Twice a day for 10 days Daily empowering leadership leads followers to have
enhanced next day proactive behaviors of voice and risk-
taking. Follower sleep quality moderates this effect.

Scott, Colquitt, Paddock, and Judge
(2010)

Empathy Appraisal theory of emotions 60 followers Once a day for 10 days Groups with managers who expressed empathy experienced
lower average levels of somatic complaints, and their daily
progress was more positively related to positive affect.

Scott, Garza, Conlon, and Kim (2014) Justice Justice theory 90 leaders Once a day for 15 days On a day-to-day basis, leaders adhere to justice norms both
due to cognitive and affective motives.

Sherf, Venkataramani, and Gajendran
(2019)

Justice Self-regulation theory 107 leaders Twice a day for 10 days When leaders face high workloads, they are more likely to
prioritize technical responsibilities over acting justly.

Shockley and Allen (2013) Supportive Theory of optimal matching 58 followers Four times a day for 10 days The positive relationship between family interference with
work conflict and blood pressure is minimized by family-
supportive leaders.

Stocker et al. (2014) Supportive No explicit model or theory 139 followers Event-based sampling for
5 days

On days that leaders showed appreciation for followers,
followers experienced higher levels of serenity.

Tariq and Ding (2018) Abusive Self-determination theory 320 followers Once a day for 10 days Abusive supervision negatively affects job performance and
positively impacts turnover intentions through a decrease in
intrinsic motivation. These effects are lessened when family
motivation is high.

Tepper et al. (2018) Transformational P-E Fit 65 followers (Study 1); 109
followers (Study 2)

Once a day for 15 days (both
studies)

The daily fit between transformational needed and received
leads to follower positive affect. This increase in positive affect
then leads to higher levels of job satisfaction, satisfaction with
leader, and OCBs.

To, Fisher, Ashkanasy, and Rowe (2012) Supportive Dual-pathway model 30 followers Thrice a day for 10 days The relationship between positive mood and creative process
engagement is stronger when leader support for creativity is
high.

Tims et al. (2011) Transformational Job demands-resources theory 42 followers Once a day for 5 days Daily transformational leadership increases followers' daily
work engagement by increasing their levels of optimism.

Tomprou and Nikolaou (2013) Extending promises Psychological contract theory 85 followers Once a day for 10 days Promises made by line managers had more of an effect on
newcomers' beliefs in employer's promises compared to
promises made by HR managers and promises made by top
management.

Tsai and Chen (2017) Supportive Personal resource depletion
theory

67 followers Every time the employee had
an interaction with a customer

The negative relationship between customer negative affective
displays and employee positive affective displays was
minimized by perceived supervisory support.

Van Dijke, Leunissen, Wildschut, and
Sedikides (2019)

Justice Self memory system model 128 followers (Study 1); 311
followers (Study 2)

Once a day for 10 days (Study
1); Once a day for 5 days
(Study 2)

The positive effect between nostalgia and both intrinsic
motivation and work effort is strongest in situation of low
interactional justice from leaders.

(continued on next page)

T
.K
.
K
elem

en,
et

al.
The Leadership Q

uarterly 31 (2020) 101344

7



Table 1 (continued)

Authors (year) Leadership behavior Theoretical framework Data source Data collection frequency &
duration

Key findings

Venus, Johnson, Zhang, Wang, and Lanaj
(2018)

Vision communication Construal level theory 44 leaders Twice a day for 15 days Leader construal level in the morning positively affected
leader vision communication during the day, but only for
leaders whose leadership self-identity was high.

Vogel and Mitchell (2017) Abusive supervision Self-defense view & self-
presentational view

73 followers Once a day for 15–21 days Daily abusive supervision leads to a decrease in follower self-
esteem, which leads to an increase in follower workplace
deviance and self-presentational behaviors. The negative
relationship between daily abusive supervision and follower
daily self-esteem is stronger when turnover intentions are low.

Volmer (2015) Exchange Affective events theory 98 followers Thrice a day for 5 days Daily social conflict between followers and leaders leads to
increases in negative affect for followers before they go to bed.
Between-level effects of both core self-evaluations and
procedural justice perceptions moderate this relationship.

Weiss, Razinskas, Backmann, and Hoegl
(2018)

Authentic Ego depletion theory 44 leaders Once a day for 10 days Authentic leadership decreases leaders' stress and increases
their work engagement and the effects are mediated by leader
mental depletion.

Wijewardena et al. (2017) LMX Affective events theory &
comprehension-elaboration
theory

889 followers Every time an event occurred
over 10 days

Follower's perceptions of leader humor behaviors impact
followers' emotions. When followers perceive their leader's
humor to be positive, they often experience an increase in
positive emotions. When followers perceive their leader's
humor to be negative, they often experience an increase in
negative emotions.

Xanthopoulou, Dakker, Demerouti, and
Schaufeli (2012)

Coaching Broaden & build theory 42 followers Once a day for 5 days Day-level coaching increases follower positive emotions and
personal resources for that day.

Yagil and Medler-Liraz (2014) Authentic No explicit model or theory 76 followers Once a day for 10 days The relationship between followers' positive emotions and
their authentic self-expression is stronger if they have leaders
who engage in authentic leadership behaviors.

Yang and Diefendorff (2009) Justice Affective events theory 231 followers Once a day for 25 days Perceived leader interpersonal justice behaviors increase
follower negative emotions and lead to follower
counterproductive work behaviors.

Yeung and Shen (2019) Abusive, consideration, and
structure initiating

Affective events theory 103 leaders Once a day for 10 days Daily authentic pride leads to more use of initiating structure
and consideration. Daily hubristic pride leads to more abusive
supervision.

Zacher (2016) Mentoring Career construction theory 159 followers Once a day for 5 days Daily leader career mentoring was negatively associated with
follower daily concern and positively associated with follower
daily curiosity.

Zacher and Wilden (2014) Ambidextrous Ambidexterity Theory 113 followers Once a day for 5 days On days that leaders use ambidextrous leadership, followers
are more innovative.

T
.K
.
K
elem

en,
et

al.
The Leadership Q

uarterly 31 (2020) 101344

8



Review of theoretical approaches

Key to effective leadership research is using theory to develop ar-
guments. Whereas the leadership field has been criticized for its lack of
solid leadership theories (e.g., Van Knippenberg & Sitkin, 2013), several
different theoretical perspectives have been adopted to understand the
causes and consequences of daily leadership. Most studies identified in
our review utilized an overall model or theoretical framework to build
their arguments (66/74 articles - 89%), but there was a portion of ar-
ticles that failed to use an overarching theoretical framework to guide
their arguments (8/74 articles - 11%). We identified three dominant
types of theoretical perspectives to explain the daily causes and con-
sequences of leadership, namely stressor/strain theories (e.g., job de-
mands-resource theory, conservation of resources theory, ego depletion
theory; 18/66 articles - 27%), affect/emotion theories (e.g., affective
events theory, broaden-and-build theory; 16/66 articles - 24%), and
motivation theories (e.g., self-determination theory; 12/66 articles -
18%). In total, these three types of theoretical perspectives made up
70% all the studies in our review that relied upon theory and 62% of all
the articles in our review. In addition to these three types of theoretical
perspectives, seven articles used social theories (e.g., social learning
theory), six articles used cognitive theories (e.g., cognitive energetic
theory), and three used leadership theories (e.g., leader identity
theory). The other articles used a variety of other theoretical perspec-
tives such as justice theory, psychological contracts theory, etc. Table 1
reports the theory or model used by each study, and Table 2 sum-
marizes the theoretical perspectives used in daily leadership research.

Importantly, not all leadership research is appropriate for daily
study. Studies that look at long term changes in leadership or stable
relations are not well suited for daily studies. However, during our
review process, we were pleased to observe that the majority of articles
did use daily leadership studies to answer questions that could not have
been answered as effectively using other methods. Many studies looked
at the antecedents or outcomes of short-term factors, which are the
types of things best studied for daily ESM studies. Also, many studies
used stressor/strain theories or affect/emotion theories as their overall
theoretical perspective. The studies of specific stressors, affect, and
emotions related to leadership are the types of theoretical questions
that are well suited to be examined in a daily fashion because they can
be short-lived.

Review of methodological approaches

While prior research has already provided advice on how to conduct
general (e.g., Gabriel et al., 2018) and leadership-specific (e.g., Ohly &
Gochmann, 2017) ESM studies, we highlight the methodological prac-
tices currently employed by researchers who study the daily leadership
practice. By summarizing common methodological practices, we hope
to show patterns, strengths, and weaknesses in current methodological
designs. Because there is diversity in the methodological practices used
in existing research, we discuss the articles by data sources, response
rates, and study designs. Table 3 gives a summary of the study methods
and study designs used by the articles in our review.

Data source

Of the samples included in our review, a majority of them used data
only from followers (54 of 78 samples – 69%), some used only leader
report data (16 of 78 samples – 21%), and a small number of samples
used data from both leaders and followers (8 of 78 samples – 10%). One
study used both follower and customer data (Myrden & Kelloway,
2015). Both follower and leader reports used to explore the daily re-
lations of leadership are valid and useful. Yet, it is important to note
that a majority of our information about the daily aspects of leadership
are from follower perceptions. The studies that did include leaders in
their samples typically did not specify the type or level of leader
measured. This is unfortunate because a leader's level within the or-
ganization has important implications for understanding leadership and

Table 2
Theoretical perspectives.

Theory Number of studies

Affective events theory 12
Job demands-resource theory 5
Conservation of resources theory 4
Ego depletion theory 4
Broaden and build theory 3
Self-determination theory 3
Self-regulation theory 3
Transformational leadership theory 2

Work-home resource model 2
Ambidexterity theory 1
Appraisal theory of emotions 1
Boundary theory 1
Career construction theory 1

Cognitive energetic theory 1
Componential theory of creativity 1
Comprehension-elaboration theory 1
Consent-based theory of power 1
Construal level theory 1
Dual-pathway model 1
Flow theory 1
Justice theory 1
Leader identity theory 1

Model of proactive motivation 1
Moral licensing theory 1
P-E fit theory 1
Personal resource depletion theory 1
Psychological contract theory 1
Regulatory focus theory 1
Resource drain theory 1
Self-control strength model 1

Self-defense and self-preservation view 1
Self-memory system model 1
Service-profit chain model 1
Social distance theory of power 1
Social exchange theory 1
Social identity theory 1
Social judgement theory 1

Social learning theory 1
Theory of optimal matching 1
Uncertainty management theory 1

Table 3
Summary of methods and study designs.

Type of daily ESM study

Interval-
contingent

Signal-
contingent

Event-
based

Overall

Total number of
samples

67 5 6 78

Times measured per
day

Once a day 44 3 – 47
Twice a day 14 – – 14
Thrice a day 6 – – 6
Four or more times 3 2 – 5

Length of study (in
workdays)

3–5 days 19 1 2 22
6–10 days 33 4 3 40
11 or more days 15 – 1 16

Data source
Follower 47 3 5 54
Leader 14 2 – 16
Both 6 – 1 8

Note: the total number of samples is greater than the total number of articles
reviewed because several articles had more than one sample.

T.K. Kelemen, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101344

9



should be included in future research. Finally, most studies relied upon
a single source for their data collection (i.e., either only leaders or only
followers). Of course, collecting multiple measures from multiple par-
ticipants at multiple points in time can be challenging. But study de-
signs that do collect data from multiple sources overcome issues of
common method bias (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Lee, & Podsakoff, 2003).
This is important because ESM study designs do not overcome the
weaknesses of common method bias in and of themselves (Gabriel et al.,
2018).

Response rates and inclusion criteria

While response rates varied across studies, most studies got response
rates between 70 and 90%. Before analyzing the data, some studies
excluded data from participants who completed less than 20% (e.g.,
Barnes et al., 2015), 50% (e.g., Breevaart & Bakker, 2018), or 80% (e.g.,
Courtright et al., 2016; Judge et al., 2006) of the surveys. Also, re-
sponses were excluded for participants who responded when not at
work (e.g., Bono et al., 2007), responded outside of the specified time
frame (e.g., Courtright et al., 2016) or when data was not available for
both the leader and follower. Finally, some studies had missing data
because participants were instructed to report the number of interac-
tions they had with their leader on a day and responses were excluded
when participants did not interact with their leader during the day
(e.g., Liao et al., 2018; Meier & Gross, 2015). However, even though
most articles had to deal with a substantial amount of missing data due
to the nature of ESM studies, almost no articles mentioned the use of
modern missing data techniques (Enders, 2010; Graham, 2009;
Newman, 2014). We hope future daily leadership studies will better
utilize these missing data techniques.

Type of daily ESM study

Interval-contingent
Most samples in our review used interval-contingent sampling, with

67 of 78 (86%) using this sampling method. Of these samples, 44 of 67
collected measures once a day, 14 of 69 collected measures twice a day,
6 of 69 collected measures thrice a day, and 3 collected measures four
or more times a day. Collecting data once a day for a day-to-day study
design, such as exploring how previous day factors affects next day
leader behavior (e.g., Courtright et al., 2016), temporally separates
independent from dependent variables and reduces common-method
bias. Yet, several studies in our review not only used single-source data,
but also collected their independent and dependent variables at the
same time. Scholars that explore the daily aspects of leadership using an
interval-contingent sampling design benefit by having temporal se-
paration between their independent and dependent variables, particu-
larly when they are collecting all their data from a single source. Future
research should temporally separate independent and dependent vari-
ables where possible. Many interval-contingent samples also fail to
capitalize on measuring leadership relationship in their natural context
by having participant's complete measure at home, or after work.

The number of days included in interval-contingent samples ranged
from three days to over a month. Of the samples in our review, 19 of 67
(28%) measured responses for 3–5 days, 33 of 67 (49%) measured re-
sponses for 6–10 days, and 15 of 67 (22%) measured responses for 11 or
more days. Prior research on ESM study designs has recommended
measuring participants for at least 10 days (Gabriel et al., 2018; Ohly &
Gochmann, 2017). Therefore, future leadership researchers should do
better at following this best practice or explain why they deviate from
this recommendation.

Signal-contingent
Only six samples used a signal-contingent study design. Two studies

relied upon leader reports, and three relied upon follower reports.
Three studies collected measures once per day, and two studies

collected measures four or more times a day. One study collected data
for 3–5 days, and the other four studies collected data for 6–10 days.
These studies followed best practice.

Event-based
Six samples used event-based sampling. Five of the samples used

follower-reported data and one sample used both leader- and follower-
reported data. Two samples lasted 3–5 days, three lasted 6–10 days, and
one lasted 11 or more days. The number of times participants re-
sponded per day depended upon the number of times the event being
measured occurred each day. This study design allows researchers to
get as proximal to leader behaviors or follower outcomes as possible
because participants respond right after the event being studied occurs.
Based on the current state of the science, these relations are less stu-
died. In addition, this type of study design fully captures the benefit of
daily studies of capturing “life as it is lived” (Bolger et al., 2003) by
measuring leadership relations in their natural context and as close to
their occurrence as possible. We hope future research will utilize this
study design more often.

Review of leader behaviors

We review the literature on daily leadership research by discussing
the findings organized by leadership behavior (e.g., transformational,
abusive). The sections on each behavior are organized by 1) a summary
of methods and theories used for the leader behavior, 2) a summary of
the direct and indirect consequences of the daily leader behavior, 3) a
summary of the causes (i.e., antecedents) of the daily leadership be-
havior, and 4) a summary of the leader behavior as a moderator be-
tween daily relations.

Daily transformational leadership behaviors

Methods and theory
We found 16 articles that explored the daily aspects of transfor-

mational leader behaviors and the sub-facets of transformational lea-
dership (e.g., vision communication). Out of the 16 articles that we
found, 13 used interval contingent sampling and 1 used signal-con-
tingent sampling (Nielsen & Cleal, 2011). In addition, the samples of ten
studies consisted of only followers, the samples of three studies only
included leaders, two studies included both leaders and followers, and
one study included both followers and their customers (Myrden &
Kelloway, 2015). Finally, a range of different theories were used to
study daily transformational leadership, the most frequently used being
job demands-resources theory, transformational leadership theory, and
self-determination theory.

Consequences
Eleven out of sixteen articles in our review explored the daily

consequences of leader transformational behaviors for followers and
the leaders themselves, showing that daily transformational leadership
behaviors have positive, proximal consequences for both. First, daily
transformational leadership behaviors have been found to increase
followers' state job engagement on a daily basis via an increase in fol-
lowers' optimism (e.g., Tims et al., 2011), autonomy, or social support
(e.g., Breevaart et al., 2014). In addition to job engagement, on days
that leaders show more transformational leadership, followers engage
in more job crafting behaviors (Hetland et al., 2018), experience more
positive affect (Kelloway et al., 2013), have an increase in positive job
attitudes (Hetland et al., 2015; Myrden & Kelloway, 2015), display
more personal initiative (Kuonath et al., 2017), and are more likely to
cooperate with their team members (Diebig et al., 2017). Followers also
report more daily positive emotions when they rate their leader as
transformational (Bono et al., 2007). Work by Tepper et al. (2018)
found that daily transformational leader behaviors increase follower
state positive affect and job satisfaction, but only when followers feel a

T.K. Kelemen, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101344

10



need for transformational leadership. In addition to the daily con-
sequences of transformational leadership for followers, Lanaj et al.
(2016) found that daily transformational leader behaviors increased the
leaders' own state positive affect and decreased their state negative
affect.

Causes
Our review identified four daily studies that highlighted the prox-

imal antecedents of daily transformational leadership behavior. Two of
these studies show that daily job demands and characteristics affect
leaders' daily use of transformational behavior. Daily email demands
were found to reduce leaders' daily transformational behaviors via goal
progress (Rosen et al., 2019), while situational factors like planning,
problem-solving, and brainstorming were found to lead to increases in
day-to-day use of transformational leader behaviors (Nielsen & Cleal,
2011). Both of these articles are great examples of articles measuring
specific variables that would be difficult to capture without using ESM.

From a frequency perspective, Johnson et al. (2012) found that
individuals with a high collective (as opposed to individual) identity
displayed higher mean levels of transformational leadership behaviors
and less daily variation in their transformational leadership behaviors.
Finally, Venus, Johnson, Zhang, Wang, and Lanaj (2018) explored
proximal antecedents to a specific component of transformational
leader behavior – vision communication. They found that when a lea-
der's construal level (i.e., the extent to which an individual focuses on
the big picture rather than the details) is high in the morning, leaders
engage in more vision communication behaviors later in the day. Taken
together, the daily demands, tasks, and perspectives of a leader affect
when a leader engages in daily transformational leadership behaviors.

Moderators
Breevaart and Bakker (2018) found that daily transformational

leadership enhances the positive effects of daily cognitive and workload
demands onto followers' daily work engagement and reduces the ne-
gative effect between daily role-conflict and followers' work engage-
ment. Thus, daily transformational leader behaviors can enhance the
positive effects of followers' daily challenge demands and reduce the
negative effects of daily hindrances. Relatedly, Bono et al. (2007) found
that the negative daily relation between follower emotion regulation
and daily job satisfaction was buffered by transformational leadership.

Daily transactional leadership behaviors and initiating structure

Methods and theory
We found six studies on daily transactional leadership, almost all of

which (k=5) used interval contingent sampling. Half of the studies
(k= 3) included only followers, whereas the other half (k= 3) gath-
ered data just from the leaders. In the studies, different theories were
used, ranging from boundary theory (Derks et al., 2015) to affective
events theory (Yeung & Shen, 2019) to psychological contract theory
(Tomprou & Nikolaou, 2013).

Consequences
Two out of six articles explored the proximal consequences of leader

transactional and initiating structure behaviors. Like transformational
leader behaviors, the daily use of contingent reward behavior was
found to be indirectly and positively related to followers' daily work
engagement via both autonomy and social support (Breevaart et al.,
2014). However, daily active management by exception was found to
be negatively related to follower engagement via decreases in daily
autonomy (Breevaart et al., 2014). Furthermore, Tomprou and
Nikolaou (2013) showed that daily newcomer beliefs in promises made
by people within their organization were higher when these promises
were made by their line managers compared to HR managers and top
management.

Causes
Three studies looked at proximal antecedents to daily transactional

and initiating structure behaviors. Yeung and Shen (2019) found leader
authentic pride to be associated with more structure initiating and
consideration behaviors. Rosen et al. (2019) found that for leaders low
in self-control, daily email demands led to decreases in leader structure
initiating behaviors through a decrease in goal progress. Finally,
Nielsen and Cleal (2010) showed that the more leaders engaged in daily
planning, problem-solving, and evaluation of tasks, the more flow they
experienced at work.

Moderators
Finally, one study examined a transactional leader behavior as a

moderator between follower daily behaviors. Derks et al. (2015) found
that when leaders expect followers to be online after work hours, the
positive relation between followers' daily smartphone use and daily
work-home interference is strengthened.

Daily abusive leadership behaviors

Methods and theory
Overall, we found twelve studies on daily abusive behaviors, in-

cluding leader incivility. Most used interval contingent sampling
(k=11), and one study (Meier & Gross, 2015) used event-contingent
sampling. Five studies focused solely on followers, whereas three stu-
dies focused on the leaders and three studies focused on both leaders
and followers. Most studies built on affect or emotion theories, such as
affective events theory (e.g., Butts et al., 2015), or stressor strain the-
ories, such as ego-depletion (e.g., Barnes et al., 2015) and conservations
of resources theory (e.g., Qin et al., 2018). Compared to other leader
behaviors, daily studies on abusive leader behaviors have tended to
draw from similar types of theoretical perspectives.

Consequences
Seven studies looked at the daily consequences of leader abusive

behaviors. First, Vogel and Mitchell (2017) showed that daily abusive
leadership behaviors lead to an increase in followers' daily workplace
deviance due to a daily loss of self-esteem. Daily abusive leader beha-
vior has also been found to decrease followers' daily intrinsic motiva-
tion (Tariq & Ding, 2018) and daily work engagement (Barnes et al.,
2015) and increase followers' turnover intentions (Tariq & Ding, 2018).
In addition, followers often exhibit incivility towards their leaders in
response to incivility they experienced that day (Meier & Gross, 2015).

The daily use of abusive leader behaviors also has consequences for
the leaders themselves. Interestingly, engaging in abusive leader be-
haviors in the morning causes leaders to experience guilt and a sense of
lost moral credits, and as a result, leaders are more likely to engage in
constructive leader behaviors in the afternoon (Liao et al., 2018).
Abusive leader behaviors during the day have also been found to result
in decreased need fulfillment and relaxation at the end of the day
(Foulk et al., 2018). In contrast, research has found that abusive leader
behaviors during the day can lead to enhanced recovery at the end of
the day due to leader resource conservation and leads to next day leader
work engagement (Qin et al., 2018). However, the recovery effects due
to abusive leader behaviors seem to be short-lived, and engaging in
these abusive behaviors has a negative effect on leaders' work en-
gagement after several days. Taken together, these findings suggest that
additional future work is needed to synthesize the conflicting personal
consequences of leader abusive behaviors on the leaders themselves.

Causes
Five studies explored the short-term daily antecedents to abusive

leader behaviors. Specifically, it has been found that a leader's previous
night's sleep quality (Barnes et al., 2015) and previous day's level of
family-to-work conflict (Courtright et al., 2016) increase the leader's
depletion of ego resources, which leads to more abusive leader

T.K. Kelemen, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101344

11



behaviors the next day. Also, Johnson et al. (2012) found that leaders
with an individual (vs. collective) identity showed higher daily mean
levels of abusive supervision and less variation in their abusive super-
vision behaviors. Other studies highlight how daily feelings of psy-
chological power can increase daily abusive behaviors (Foulk et al.,
2018), and how leader pride can also be a source of daily abusive leader
behaviors (Yeung & Shen, 2019). Thus, both pre-work factors, such as
sleep quality and family interaction, and a leader's psychological and
emotional state are important antecedents of daily abusive behaviors.

Moderators
Finally, two studies explored abusive leader behaviors as a mod-

erator. One study found that followers were more likely to experience
daily anger after receiving a negatively toned message when it came
from a leader (versus coworker) who was high in abusive behaviors
(Butts et al., 2015). Bormann (2017) found that previous day abusive
supervision moderates the relation between ethical leadership and
follower engagement. The work by Bormann (2017) is an excellent
example of a within-person study that challenges how we view lea-
dership by showing that leaders may be abusive one day but ethical
another. It is also a good example of showing how two types of leader
behaviors interact with each other on a day-to-day basis.

Daily leader justice behaviors

Methods and theory
Eight studies focused on daily justice behaviors of leaders, exploring

both the causes and the consequences of daily justice behaviors. Leader
justice behaviors include behaving equitably, fairly, and without bias.
All of these articles used interval contingent sampling. Affective events
theory was used most often (e.g., Ford et al., 2018; Judge et al., 2006;
Yang & Diefendorff, 2009). Justice (Scott et al., 2014) and motivation
theories (Sherf et al., 2019) were used as well.

Consequences
Five studies explored the daily consequences of leader justice be-

haviors. When followers perceive that their leaders exhibit low levels of
justice on a given day, this leads to increases in follower daily negative
emotions, which then increases followers' likelihood to engage in CWBs
(Yang & Diefendorff, 2009). Also, followers feel more job satisfaction
and less hostility on days that their leader displays more interpersonal
justice (Judge et al., 2006). Similarly, followers experience less anger
when their leader behaves with interactional justice, which then in-
directly reduces follower daily CWB (Ford et al., 2018). And leaders
that vary in their justice behaviors from day to day increase followers'
daily stress which increases followers' daily job dissatisfaction and daily
emotional exhaustion (Matta et al., 2017). With regard to the con-
sequences for leaders themselves, research has found that daily proce-
dural justice behaviors are draining for leaders but that daily interac-
tional justice behaviors are replenishing for leaders; both indirectly
affect leader OCB (Johnson et al., 2014).

Causes
Two studies have looked at the causes of daily leader justice beha-

viors. Leaders' daily cognitive motives of compliance, identity main-
tenance, and fairness, and their affective motives of positive and ne-
gative affect all were found to influence their daily practice of justice
behaviors (Scott et al., 2014). Sherf et al. (2019) showed that leaders'
daily workload induces leaders to prioritize technical tasks over justice
behaviors, which decreases their daily behaviors of justice rule ad-
herence (i.e., the manner in which individuals adhere to rules of justice
such as explaining decisions, providing logic for decisions, or seeking
input). The study by Sherf et al. (2019) is an excellent example of a
daily leadership study exploring the short-term process of leadership
using specific variables that would have been difficult to study in an-
other way.

Moderators
Finally, one study explored leader justice behaviors as a moderator.

High levels of daily leader displays of interactional justice were found
to minimize the positive effects between nostalgia and both daily in-
trinsic motivation and daily work effort (Van Dijke et al., 2019). Thus,
interactional justice can act as a compensatory mechanism for em-
ployees that feel low levels of nostalgia. The research on leader daily
justice behaviors mirrors several findings identified in the abusive
leadership section – work characteristics are important antecedents and
follower negative affective reactions are key outcomes. This is not
surprising, given that followers of abusive supervisors often feel un-
justly treated.

Daily leader-follower interactions

Methods and theory
Daily leadership studies on leader-member exchange and other

types of dyadic interactions between leaders and followers highlight
how leader-follower interaction at the daily level has short-term con-
sequences for both leaders and followers. We found nine articles that
studied daily leader-follower interactions. Seven used only follower
measures and one used leader and follower measures. Five of these
studies are interval-contingent sampling studies, three studies used
event-based sampling, and one study used a signal-contingent method.
Almost all studies used affect/emotion theories (e.g., Wijewardena
et al., 2017) or social theories (*Liao et al., 2018) as their theoretical
framework.

Consequences
Eight studies focused on the consequences of leader-follower inter-

actions. First, there are emotional and affective consequences for fol-
lowers when they interact with their leader daily. For example, conflict
episodes during the day with one's leader have been found to increase
followers' daily negative affect (Volmer, 2015). Also, daily interactions
with one's leader have been found to lead to fewer positive emotions
than daily interactions with one's co-workers (Bono et al., 2007), and
negative work events involving one's leader create higher levels of
follower negative emotions compared to negative events involving co-
workers (Matta et al., 2014). Finally, an event study of leader humor
behaviors found that positive leader humor increased positive emotions
among followers, while negative leader humor increased negative
emotions among followers (Wijewardena et al., 2017). Daily leader-
follower interactions have also been found to enhance follower be-
longingness, which enhances follower vigor and decrease emotional
exhaustion (Ellis et al., 2018). And leader-follower interactions studied
at the event-level show that resource contribution surplus leads to
feelings of reciprocity and subsequent enhanced levels of work en-
gagement (*Liao et al., 2018). However, Kudesia and Reina (2019) did
not find daily interactions with trustworthy leaders to be significantly
related to within-person changes in follower mindfulness. Finally, Li
et al. (in press) found that leaders are less likely to accept employee
voice when they are more depleted.

Causes
Only one studied looked at the causes of leader-behavior interac-

tion. Lam et al. (2019) found that for followers, daily voice directness
was positively related to leader endorsement behavior, but only for
individuals who had high voice credibility.

Daily leader supportive behaviors

Methods and theory
Overall, we found 23 daily studies on supportive supervision, which

made it the most studied leader behavior in our review. These studies
measured both general leader support as well as specific types of leader
support such as coaching, mentoring, helping, family support, support

T.K. Kelemen, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101344

12



for creativity, etc. Most used interval-contingent methodology, and two
studies used event-sampling methodology. All but two of the studies
only collected data from followers, and those studies collected data
from both followers and leaders. These studies used a variety of theo-
retical perspectives such as affective events theory (k=3), conserva-
tions of resources theory (k= 3), work-home resource perspective
(k= 2), and job demands-resources theory (k= 2). However, five of
these studies did not use an overall theoretical perspective.

Consequences
In our review, 12 studies explored the follower and leader con-

sequences of supportive behaviors. Most studies explored follower af-
fective consequences to leader daily support. For example, Amabile
et al. (2004) found that daily leader-reported supportive behaviors
positively affected followers' daily perceptions of leader support and
created a beneficial affective reaction for followers, which then posi-
tively affected their day-to-day creativity levels. The daily use of em-
pathy by one's leader was found to decrease followers' daily somatic
complaints and strengthen the relation between followers' daily goal
progress and their state positive affect (Scott et al., 2010). Research also
found that leader developmental feedback leads to follower positive
affect, which then increases follower creativity on a within-person basis
(Christensen-Salem et al., 2018).

Ford et al. (2018) found that daily leader helping led to more epi-
sodic gratitude towards the organization, which increased the pre-
valence of OCBs and decreased the prevalence of CWBs. Also, day-level
coaching has been found to increase positive emotions and personal
resources for followers who receive the coaching (Xanthopoulou et al.,
2012). And Stocker et al. (2014) found that followers experienced
higher levels of serenity on days that leaders showed appreciation for
followers. Taken together, these results show that daily leader support
tends to enhance follower daily affect.

However, in contrast to this general finding, two studies found that
daily leader support hurt or had no effect on follower affect. Jones and
Johnston (2012) found that nurses who received managerial support
after a negative incident were more likely to have a decrease in positive
affect. And daily supervisor support was found to not interact with
negative affect to influence perceived quality of care (Jones & Johnston,
2013).

In addition to affective reactions, daily leader support can cause
followers to be more effective and creative. For example, daily super-
visor support can stimulate followers to use their strengths more on the
following day (Lavy et al., 2017). Also, daily supervisory career men-
toring was found to be negatively associated with daily concern and
positively associated with daily curiosity (Zacher, 2016). Finally, re-
search has found that on days leaders both stimulate follower's ex-
ploration of ideas and facilitate the exploitation of ideas (i.e., use am-
bidextrous leadership), followers display more innovative behavior
(Zacher & Wilden, 2014). The general trend across these studies high-
lights how leaders' daily supportive behaviors tend to increase fol-
lowers' daily positive affect and followers' daily creativity/innovation.

Leader supportive behaviors also have consequences for the leader.
Lanaj and Jennings (2019) found that leaders experienced more nega-
tive affect on days that they helped followers with personal problems.
They also found that followers rated their leaders as less engaged on
days that they had helped them with personal problems. This study by
Lanaj and Jennings (2019) explored an interesting within-person rela-
tion, showing a potential dark side to leader support. This likely would
have been difficult to show at a between-person level of analysis.

Causes
Only one study looked at the antecedents of supportive leader be-

haviors. Dollard and Idris (2017) found that espoused psychological
safety climate by the organization led to an increase in daily enacted
leader support.

Moderators
In addition to exploring daily consequences, 11 studies looked at

leader support as a moderator for various daily relations. For example,
one study found that daily leader social support often weakens the
positive relation between follower daily workload and emotional ex-
haustion (Pluut et al., 2018). Daily supportive leadership also buffers
the relation between follower work-family conflict and follower end-of-
day cortisol levels (Almeida et al., 2016). Daily leader support also
strengthens the negative relation between espoused psychological
safety and daily emotional exhaustion (Dollard & Idris, 2017). How-
ever, Blanco-Donoso et al. (2017) did not find that daily supervisor
support buffers the negative effect that daily difficulties to regulate
emotions at work had on emotional exhaustion, fatigue, and negative
affect.

Several studies have shown how general supportive supervision
moderates several types of daily work and home conflicts. For example,
To et al. (2012) found that the daily positive relation between positive
mood and creative process engagement is stronger when general leader
support for creativity is high. General supportive supervision also
minimizes the effects of daily work-to-family conflict to follower ne-
gative affect (Almeida et al., 2016); it reduces the positive effect daily
family-to-work conflict has on follower daily counterproductive work
behavior (Germeys & De Gieter, 2017), aggression towards supervisors
and co-workers (Liu et al., 2015), and blood pressure (Shockley & Allen,
2013); and it reduces the effect between follower daily workload and
work-family conflict (Goh et al., 2015). Leader supportive behavior also
reduces the relation between follower experiences of daily incivility
and daily stress (Beattie & Griffin, 2014), as well as the relation be-
tween negative customer experiences on employee positive affect (Tsai
& Chen, 2017). In aggregate, these studies provide considerable evi-
dence that supportive leader behaviors can reduce the effects of fol-
lower daily negative workplace stressors.

Daily moral leader behaviors

Methods and theory
Moral approaches to leadership in this review include the following

three types of leadership: servant leadership, authentic leadership, and
ethical leadership (Hoch, Bommer, Dulebohn, & Wu, 2018; Lemoine,
Hartnell, & Leroy, 2019). Each of these leadership theories taps into
moral motifs of leader actions. We identified four studies that explored
the daily occurrence and consequences of moral leadership behaviors.
All but one focused on follower perceptions, and all used interval-
contingent sampling methodology.

Consequences
Three studies explored the consequences of leader moral behaviors.

Daily ethical leadership was found to enhance follower daily engage-
ment and subsequent helping behavior later in the day (Bormann,
2017). However, the positive effects of daily ethical leadership beha-
viors onto followers' work engagement are attenuated by the leader's
previous day abusive behavior (Bormann, 2017). Daily servant lea-
dership has been found to lead to an increase in next-day follower goal
attainment (Rodríguez-Carvajal et al., 2019). Moral leader behaviors
also have consequences of the leader. One study found that daily au-
thentic leadership behaviors do not deplete leaders' ego resources but
enhance leaders' work engagement and decrease leaders' stress levels
(Weiss et al., 2018). Thus, moral leader behaviors can be energizing for
leaders as well.

Moderators
Finally, one studied explored moral leadership as a moderator. Yagil

and Medler-Liraz (2014) found that the relation between followers'
daily positive emotions and their levels of authentic self-expression is
stronger when they have a leader who displays more authentic lea-
dership behaviors.

T.K. Kelemen, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101344

13



Surprisingly, only one study identified in our review explored daily
servant leadership behaviors (Rodríguez-Carvajal et al., 2019). This is
unfortunate given that servant leadership, as a general behavior pat-
tern, predicts more variance above and beyond transformational lea-
dership than both ethical and authentic leadership (Hoch et al., 2018).

Daily empowering leadership behaviors

Methods and theory
Empowering leadership is an emerging leadership theory and in-

cludes leader behaviors such as involving followers in decisions, dele-
gating responsibilities to followers, and encouraging followers to take
initiative (Zhang & Bartol, 2010). Only two studies examined how
empowering leadership as rated by followers can affect followers' daily
outcomes. One study used interval-contingent sampling with two
measurement points a day (Schilpzand et al., 2018), and one study used
event-sampling study (Dong et al., 2015).

Consequences
First, Schilpzand et al. (2018) showed that daily empowering lea-

dership led followers to engage in more proactive goal setting the next
day, which consequently enhanced followers' daily voice and risk-
taking behaviors. These relations were strengthened when followers
had a good night rest (Schilpzand et al., 2018).

Moderators
The second study found that general empowering leadership was a

cross-level moderator that strengthens the relation between follower
state promotion focus and creativity; empowering leadership also
moderated the indirect effect between customer empowering behavior
to creativity via state promotion focus (Dong et al., 2015). Thus, em-
powering leader behaviors can help facilitate follower daily proactivity
and daily creativity.

Leader intervention

Finally, two studies explored a daily leader behavioral intervention.
In an experimental ESM study, Lanaj et al. (2019) showed that on days
when leaders engaged in a positive self-reflection exercise, they re-
ported less energy depletion, which led to heightened work engagement
for the leader and an increased sense of clout (perceptions of self-con-
fidence and authority) and prosocial impact on others. This study
suggests that positive self-reflection behaviors can be an important
mechanism to assist leaders in their day-to-day leadership. Foulk et al.
(2018) also conducted an experimental ESM study and manipulated
leader psychological power. Psychological power was found to increase
leader abusive behaviors.

Discussion

The number of daily studies that incorporate leadership has seen a
rapid increase in the past few years. Recent scholarly work on daily
leadership behaviors has not only increased our collective knowledge of
leadership but has also opened up opportunities avenues for new re-
search. Based on our discussion of the importance of studying daily
leadership and review of the literature, we now provide recommenda-
tions for future research. Drawing upon our review we suggest ways
scholars can provide more depth and breadth with daily leadership
studies. In Table 4, we provide a summary of our recommendations for
future research.

Depth

Time
An important avenue for the future is to incorporate time when

studying daily leadership. Very few studies in our review explicitly

addressed time in their theorizing. This is unfortunate because time is
an important element in leadership that is too often overlooked
(Castillo & Trinh, 2018; Shamir, 2011). Further, an important ad-
vantage to daily studies is their ability to explain short-term processes
in leadership. And time is an important boundary condition for many of
the theories used to understand leadership at the daily level such as
stress/strain theories, affect/emotion theories, and theories of motiva-
tion. Some studies in our review would explore how leadership re-
lationships occurred all in one day (e.g., Barnes et al., 2015; Breevaart
& Bakker, 2018; Christensen-Salem et al., 2018) while others explored
how leadership relationships existed from one day to the next (e.g.,
Courtright et al., 2016; Lavy et al., 2017; Schilpzand et al., 2018). For
many studies, it was not clear why they focused on relationships only at
a day level or at a day-to-day level. Some studies did incorporate time
as a part of their study. For example, Qin et al. (2018) found that the
leader personal benefit of improved recovery levels from abusive su-
pervision is short-lived for the leader and Meier and Gross (2015) found
that followers only retaliate incivility towards leaders' incivility when
the follower reacts quickly.

There are several different ways in which time may be included in
leadership theories to get a better understanding of the dynamics of
leadership behaviors. First, time (e.g., the day of the week, the time
during the day) may be an explicit predictor of leadership behaviors.
For example, could leaders be less likely to engage in transformational
behaviors towards the end of the day, and perhaps engage in more
abusive behaviors towards the end of the day due to fatigue or resource
drain? Or, what might be the consequence of daily leadership behaviors
when leaders are called to work additional hours after the typical
workday? Finally, does the day of the week have implications for what
types of behaviors leaders engage in or follower responses to leader
behaviors? Exploring daily leader behaviors by including time in dif-
ferent ways opens up opportunities to answer different types of research
questions that can enhance our understanding of the dynamics of lea-
dership.

Another important way that future research may seek to incorporate
time is to examine the time-lagged effects of daily leadership behaviors.
A few studies in our review explored time-lagged effects in their studies
(e.g., Qin et al., 2018). Future scholars could explore additional time-
lagged effects in daily leadership behaviors, since this is an important
way to understand the causes and consequences of short-term leader
behaviors. For example, understanding how long leader behaviors last
before they are diminished in value will be key for future scholarly
work. Specifically, what types of leadership behaviors have more en-
during effects and which are more fleeting? For example, because “bad”
is often more powerful than “good” (Baumeister, Bratslavsky,
Finkenauer, & Vohs, 2001) it would be interesting to understand if
destructive leader behaviors have longer-lasting impacts on follower
states compared to other constructive leader behaviors. This could also
hold true for the antecedents to leadership behaviors – negative ante-
cedents (e.g., traffic coming to work), may have a longer-lasting effect
than positive antecedents (e.g., feeling well-rested) on leader behavior.

Measure multiple leader behaviors
Leaders may exhibit many different types of leader behaviors and

daily studies are particularly well equipped to capture how different
leader behaviors relate and coexist. General measures of leadership are
often not precise enough and do not capture the transient nature of
leader behaviors. Daily studies that use a within-person design can
challenge and change how we view the relations between leader be-
haviors. For example, Breevaart et al. (2014) showed that leaders can
be transformational, rewarding, and controlling all on the same day. In
addition, Lin et al. (2016) found that leaders who behave ethically on
one day, are more likely to behave abusively the next day, as explained
by moral licensing and ego depletion. However, in the studies in our
review, few studies included multiple leader behaviors (6/74 articles
8%), and even less had more than two leader behaviors (3/74 articles

T.K. Kelemen, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101344

14



4%). More daily studies of leadership should include multiple types of
leader behaviors because it can extend understanding of leader beha-
viors that may be difficult to capture at a general level of analysis and
can challenge how we understand leadership.

Relatedly, no study explored both daily and general leadership be-
haviors together in one study. It would be interesting to see more stu-
dies taking a multilevel approach to leadership – to see how daily
processes affect general behaviors (and vice versa) and to understand
how the two interact. For example, do followers whose leader is gen-
erally inspiring and supportive react differently when their leader is
laissez-faire or abusive on a specific day compared to followers whose
leader is generally uninspiring and unsupportive? One could argue that
for the former group of followers, a daily deviation from the leader's
general behavioral patterns is seen as a breach of trust, yet one could
also argue that for this group of followers, leaders have some credits to
temporarily deviate from their usual behavior.

Use discrete and precise measures
When building leadership theory through daily studies, using more

precise and discrete measures of theoretical constructs can add rich
detail to the process of leadership. When using more general measures
of constructs (e.g., general affect, task demands, OCB), daily studies
often fail to capitalize on their opportunity to explore unique and novel
relationships. Further, more general measures of theoretical constructs
can often be effectively measured at a more general level of analysis.
For example, when exploring affective events theory, rather than ex-
ploring how daily constructive leader behaviors can cause follower
daily positive affect scholars can be more precise. Future scholars could
explore how specific daily constructive leader behaviors (e.g., vision
communication, servant, humble, supportive) are linked with specific
follower emotions. For example, is daily humble leadership more
strongly related to follower feelings of gratitude whereas daily em-
powering leadership is more strongly related to follower feelings of
excitement? Do different types of follower positive (or negative) emo-
tions from their leaders' daily behaviors yield different follower

outcomes? Or, do most follower positive (or negative) emotions caused
by leaders generally lead to similar outcomes?

Task demands (when testing job demands-resources theory) is an-
other example where future researchers can be more precise and
measure discrete, daily task demands and how they relate to daily
leadership. For example, how do daily meeting demands affect daily
leadership behavior? Or, how do follower specific demands relate to
leader daily behaviors? Rather than just exploring general daily de-
mands, scholars have an opportunity to be more exact in their mea-
surement. Not only will this help build theory by exploring novel re-
lationships but can also answer interesting questions and provide
insights into leadership that have traditionally been overlooked.

Specificity of leader behaviors
We encourage future researchers to be more specific about the

leader behavior studied. For example, instead of simply studying sup-
portive leadership, future research should be more specific about how
leaders are supportive of their followers on a daily basis. A number of
studies in our review were specific about different types of leader
supportive behavior measured (e.g., Christensen-Salem et al., 2018;
Germeys & De Gieter, 2017; Liu et al., 2015; Shockley & Allen, 2013)
and this should continue in the future. Also, transformational leader-
ship has recently come into criticism for being too broad (Van
Knippenberg & Sitkin, 2013). However, transformational leadership
was one of the most studied constructs in our review. We echo the re-
commendation put forward by Van Knippenberg and Sitkin (2013) to
study the dimensions of transformational leadership, and encourage
future daily leadership research to study the dimensions of transfor-
mational leadership. Finally, future research could also drill down and
find out which type of abusive supervision behaviors, when enacted on
at the daily level, are most detrimental for followers.

Table 4
Recommendations for future research.

Weakness Directions for future research Examples

Depth
Few studies incorporated time into their hypothesizing and

models.
Future research could explicitly consider time
into their theorizing and study design.

Research could explore how time of day affects leader
behavior and seek to understand how long destructive and
constructive leader behaviors affect followers at the daily
level of analysis.

A majority of studies focused on only one type of leader
behavior, but daily studies can provide theoretical insight
into how leader behaviors relate and coexist.

More future research could examine multiple
leader behaviors in a single study

Research could explore how stable leadership behaviors
interact with daily leadership behaviors to affect both leader
and follower daily outcomes.

Many studies tested theories using general measures of
theoretical constructs.

Future scholars should be more precise in their
daily measures to test theory in unique ways.

Research could examine specific emotions when testing
affective events theory or specific demands when testing job
demands-resources theory.

Some of the studies in our review looked at leader behaviors
that were very broad (e.g., supportive leadership,
transformational leadership)

Future research could do a better job of looking
at more specific leadership behaviors.

Instead of studying supportive leadership, scholars could
examine which types of supportive behaviors are most
important.

Breadth
Few studies used leader interventions. Researchers could utilize leader interventions

in their daily study designs.
Scholars could seek to understand the short-term/daily
consequences of leadership interventions, such as gratitude
or strengths-based training

Few studies used objective measures in their design. Future research could better incorporate
objective measures (especially objective
dependent variables) into study designs.

Instead of relying on self-report or other-report data, scholars
may incorporate objective measures such as daily exercise
measured by a heart rate monitor on a fit-bit, to understand
how daily physical exercise might affect leader behavior.

Some leadership behaviors have been understudied at a daily
level.

Future research could specifically examine
these understudied areas.

Research could explore daily servant, humble, and laze-faire
leadership behaviors more extensively

No studies have specifically looked at how daily followership
could affect leaders' emotions, attitudes, and behaviors.

Followers play an important role in crafting
leadership, and research could explore how
daily followership affects leaders.

Future research could explore how followership occurs on a
daily basis.

Studies in our review primarily relied upon MEMs to test their
hypotheses.

Researchers should be aware of the different
ways to model clustered data and assure that
they are correctly modeling their data.

Future research could be more explicit about how they model
their data and make sure that they explain how they meet the
necessary assumptions for the model that they use.

T.K. Kelemen, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101344

15



Breadth

Types of leader behaviors
Overall, previous leadership research has looked at a wide array of

leader behaviors. However, there are still some behaviors that have
been understudied by daily leadership scholars. Based on our review of
the literature, we encourage scholars to broaden the spectrum of lea-
dership behaviors studied in a daily fashion. For example, humble
leadership has been gaining popularity in recent years (Owens, Yam,
Bednar, Mao, & Hart, 2019), but no previous study has focused on daily
humble leadership.

Furthermore, we did not find any daily study on laissez-faire lea-
dership. Laissez-faire leadership occurs when leaders do not interfere
with their followers, but rather withdraw themselves from the work-
place. Whereas some scholars consider laissez-faire a type of non-lea-
dership, others see laissez-faire as a form of destructive leadership (for a
discussion on laissez-faire leadership, see Einarsen, Aasland, &
Skogstad, 2007 and Schyns & Schilling, 2013). Future work could study
laissez-faire leadership on a daily level of analysis. This research could
give some insights into the discussion of laissez-faire leadership, taking
into account the reasons why leaders withdraw themselves from the
workplace. For example, could it be an effective strategy to withdraw
oneself from the workplace when facing high work demands, rather
than engaging with followers with the risk of having a fallout? And does
it make a difference whether leaders are generally engaging (or not)
and how many days leaders withdraw themselves from the workplace?
Future research is needed to answer these, and other, interesting
questions regarding different daily leadership behaviors.

Followership and followers
Daily studies could also help scholars study followership and how it

alters leader behavior on a daily basis. No studies in our review ex-
plored daily followership but followership likely plays an important
role in a leader's daily behavior. For example, scholars may explore how
followers' leader-directed citizenship behavior or proactive behavior
may elicit positive types of leader behaviors, such as transformational
leader behaviors. Scholars may also explore, from a moral licensing
perspective, how follower positive behavior could create moral credits
for a leader that might increase future negative leader behaviors.

Relatedly, prior research has highlighted the benefits of leaders
adjusting their leadership behaviors to the needs of their followers (e.g.,
De Vries, Roe, & Taillieu, 2002; Lambert, Tepper, Carr, Holt, & Barelka,
2012). Indeed, one of the articles in our review examined how the daily
fit between transformational leadership needed and received leads to
follower positive affect and subsequent job satisfaction (Tepper et al.,
2018). However, each follower may have different needs, and fre-
quently adjusting behavior may be cognitively and emotionally
draining for leaders. Future daily leadership studies could look at both
the benefits and the downsides to leaders frequently changing their
types of behaviors throughout the day when interacting with different
followers.

Leader interventions
The study of daily leadership behaviors also lends itself to under-

stand the implications leadership interventions and training have for
leaders in the short-term. For example, Lanaj et al. (2019) examined
how leader reflection could positively influence the leader's daily be-
haviors. Organizations spend millions of dollars each year on leadership
development. Understanding effective leader interventions that im-
prove daily leadership behaviors has important implications for prac-
titioners. Further, understanding the means by which a leader can alter
their leader behaviors will have important implications for both fol-
lowers and organizations alike. For example, scholars might explore
how a leader gratitude intervention or strengths-based training can
impact a leader's daily leadership behavior. Research that can highlight
practical interventions, trainings, or resources that improve daily leader

behaviors will be an important way in which daily studies of leadership
can make academic leadership studies more applicable to organiza-
tions.

When measuring the effect interventions have on leader behaviors,
scholars could also use a daily ESM before the intervention and then
several months after the intervention (see Camburn, Spillane, &
Sebastian, 2010 and Nielsen & Daniels, 2012 for examples). This type of
study design would allow scholars to utilize the benefits of ESM studies,
but would also better measure the longer-term effectiveness of the in-
tervention. In a similar vein, multiple ESM studies could be used over a
longer period of time in order to get a more detailed understanding of
how leadership processes and leadership development evolve over
time.

Objective measures
Although objective data is sometimes used in daily leadership stu-

dies, most of the studies still use self-reports to gather information on
private feelings that are difficult for others to assess. Daily ESM studies
do not resolve the methodological disadvantages of self-reports, but
they do minimize many of the concerns. Global self-reports are more
strongly influenced by memory bias because when followers are asked
to think back over the last months or report general feelings about an
event, their answers often reflect general beliefs or attitudes (Schwartz,
2012; Sonnentag, Dormann, & Demerouti, 2010). Because of its proxi-
mity to the events, ESM helps reduce memory and estimation problems.
However, also due to its proximity, ESM can increase affective bias.
Therefore, future research on daily leadership behaviors could benefit
from the inclusion of more objective measures in combination with
subjective measures.

Barnes et al. (2015), Almeida et al. (2016), and Shockley and Allen
(2013) are all examples of articles that used both objective and sub-
jective measures in their studies. Barnes et al. (2015) included a mea-
sure of sleep duration. However, new methodologies such as sleep
tracking devices and location trackers (e.g., measuring whether you are
at home, at work, or in nature) now allow for even more objective
context measures (e.g., receiving a notification when you wake up).
Almeida et al. (2016) used daily saliva samples to measure cortisol
levels. Shockley and Allen (2013) used wristwatches to measure heart
rate and blood pressure throughout the day. Pairing subjective mea-
sures with daily objective measures whenever possible and suitable,
would enhance the quality of daily leadership studies and the quality of
leadership research in general. For example, future studies could use
car tracking devices to track how leader-induced follower aggression
affects subordinates' driving behavior on their commute home. Or fu-
ture work may explore how physical exercise may be an important
antecedent to constructive leader behaviors. With sleep, while prior
research has examined how lack of sleep leads to abusive supervision
(Barnes et al., 2015), future studies could look at whether abusive su-
pervision increases difficulties for followers to fall asleep due to rumi-
nation. Finally, while it would be difficult to get objective measures of
daily job performance in many jobs, there are some jobs that have
objective, daily job-performance measures (e.g., call centers, sales
companies, restaurants) that could be used in conjunction with daily
studies of leadership.

Modeling of data
Studying daily life (i.e., gathering information about the same

person at multiple days) inherently results in hierarchical, or clustered,
data (i.e., days nested within persons). Recently, McNeish and Kelley
(2019) as well as Antonakis, Bastardoz, and Rönkkö (in press) showed
that the ways in which clustered data are modeled is highly dependent
on the discipline in which the study is conducted. Specifically, re-
searchers in the field of economics primarily use fixed-effects models
(FEM), and some scholars have suggested that this is the “gold stan-
dard” for modeling clustered data (Schurer & Yong, 2012); whereas
mixed-effects models (MEM; also known as random effects models;

T.K. Kelemen, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101344

16



McNeish & Kelley, 2019) are more commonly used in the fields of
psychology and management. As these authors rightfully note, rather
than co-existing, it is important that both fields learn from one another
to advance scientific practice.

One major benefit of MEMs is that they can incorporate both level-1
and level-2 effects (or more), whereas FEMs can only incorporate level-
1 effects and account for the clustered nature of the data using dummy
codes. Yet, MEM's require that the random effects assumption (also
called exogeneity assumption) is met, meaning that the predictor
variables do not covary with the random effects. If this assumption is
violated, it means that estimates may be biased due to unmodeled
variables at the second level (e.g., a person's personality or intelligence
may affect a person's daily behavior). Antonakis et al. (in press) provide
an overview of the possibilities to test the random effects assumption
(i.e., Hausman test, Likelihood ratio test and Wald test).

One way to bridge the gap between MEMs and FEMs – to avoid
endogeneity and at the same time model Level 2 effects – is to use a
within-between specification of a mixed-effects model (WB-MEM, also
called correlated random effects models; Antonakis et al., in press;
Mundlak, 1978). These models include the cluster means of group-
mean-centered Level 1 predictors as Level 2 predictors and as such
separate the estimation of within- and between-cluster effects. We en-
courage future leadership scholars, particularly those who conduct
daily studies of leadership, to consider the (dis)advantages of all the
above-mentioned models and make a conscious decision about how to
best analyze their data. Antonakis et al. (in press) provide a very useful
decision chart that may help researchers to decide what type of model is
appropriate to test their multilevel models depending on the type of
effects that are of interest as well as the random effects assumption.

Conclusion

This review has highlighted previous research that has examined the
daily causes and consequences of leadership behaviors. By reviewing
the theoretical, behavioral, and methodological trends in daily leader-
ship research we hope that our review will provide a basis for best
practices that can be utilized as a reference for those wishing to ex-
amine daily leadership behaviors. While prior leadership research at the
daily level has begun to uncover and expand our understanding of
leadership, we have highlighted a number of areas for future scholarly
work. In so doing, we hope that future studies of daily leadership be-
haviors can extend our breadth and expound our depth of our under-
standing of daily leadership.

References3

*Almeida, D. M., Davis, K. D., Lee, S., Lawson, K. M., Walter, K. N., & Moen, P. (2016).
Supervisor support buffers daily psychological and physiological reactivity to work-
to-family conflict. Journal of Marriage and Family, 78(1), 165–179.

*Amabile, T. M., Schatzel, E. A., Moneta, G. B., & Kramer, S. J. (2004). Leader behaviors
and the work environment for creativity: Perceived leader support. The Leadership
Quarterly, 15, 5–32.

Antonakis, J., Bastardoz, N., & Rönkkö, M. (in press). On ignoring the random effects
assumption in multilevel models: Review, critique, and recommendations.
Organizational Research Methods.

*Barnes, C. M., Lucianetti, L., Bhave, D. P., & Christian, M. S. (2015). “You wouldn't like
me when I'm sleepy”: Leaders' slee, daily abusive supervision, and work unit en-
gagement. Academy of Management Journal, 58, 1419–1437.

Bass, B. M., Avolio, B. J., Jung, D. I., & Berson, Y. (2003). Predicting unit performance by
assessing transformational and transactional leadership. Journal of applied psychology,
88, 207.

Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Finkenauer, C., & Vohs, K. D. (2001). Bad is stronger
than good. Review of general psychology, 5(4), 323–370.

*Beattie, L., & Griffin, B. (2014). Day-level fluctuations in stress and engagement in re-
sponse to workplace incivility: A diary study. Work & Stress, 28(2), 124–142.

*Blanco-Donoso, L. M., Garrosa, E., Demerouti, E., & Moreno-Jiménez, B. (2017). Job
resources and recovery experiences to face difficulties in emotion regulation at work:
A diary study among nurses. International Journal of Stress Management, 24(2), 107.

Bolger, N., Davis, A., & Rafaeli, E. (2003). Diary methods: Capturing life as it is lived.
Annual Review of Psychology, 54(1), 579–616.

*Bono, J. E., Foldes, H. J., Vinson, G., & Muros, J. P. (2007). Workplace emotions: The
role of supervision and leadership. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92, 1357–1367.

*Bormann, K. C. (2017). Linking daily ethical leadership to followers’ daily behaviour:
The roles of daily work engagement and previous abusive supervision. European
Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 26(4), 590–600.

*Breevaart, K., Bakker, A., Hetland, J., Demerouti, E., Olsen, O. K., & Espevik, R. (2014).
Daily transactional and transformational leadership and daily employee engagement.
Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 87, 138–157.

*Breevaart, K., & Bakker, A. B. (2018). Daily job demands and employee work engage-
ment: The role of daily transformational leadership behavior. Journal of Occupational
Health Psychology, 23, 338–349.

Breevaart, K., & de Vries, R. E. (2017). Supervisor’s HEXACO personality traits and
subordinate perceptions of abusive supervision. The Leadership Quarterly, 28(5),
691–700.

*Butts, M. M., Becker, W. J., & Boswell, W. R. (2015). Hot buttons and time sinks: The
effects of electronic communication during nonwork time on emotions and work-
nonwork conflict. Academy of Management Journal, 58(3), 763–788.

Camburn, E. M., Spillane, J. P., & Sebastian, J. (2010). Assessing the utility of a daily log
for measuring principal leadership practice. Educational Administration Quarterly,
46(5), 707–737.

Castillo, E. A., & Trinh, M. P. (2018). In search of missing time: A review of the study of
time in leadership research. The Leadership Quarterly, 29(1), 165–178.

*Christensen-Salem, A., Kinicki, A., Zhang, Z., & Walumbwa, F. O. (2018). Responses to
feedback: The role of acceptance, affect, and creative behavior. Journal of Leadership
& Organizational Studies, 25(4), 416–429.

*Courtright, S. H., Gardner, R. G., Smith, T. A., McCormick, B. W., & Colbert, A. E. (2016).
My family made me do it: A cross-domain, self-regulatory perspective on antecedents
to abusive supervision. Academy of Management Journal, 59, 1630–1652.

Dalal, R. S., Bhave, D. P., & Fiset, J. (2014). Within-person variability in job performance:
A theoretical review and research agenda. Journal of Management, 40, 1396–1436.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206314532691.

Day, D. V., & Sin, H. P. (2011). Longitudinal tests of an integrative model of leader de-
velopment: Charting and understanding developmental trajectories. The Leadership
Quarterly, 22(3), 545–560.

De Vries, R. E., Roe, R. A., & Taillieu, T. C. (2002). Need for leadership as a moderator of
the relationships between leadership and individual outcomes. The Leadership
Quarterly, 13, 121–137.

*Derks, D., van Duin, D., Tims, M., & Bakker, A. B. (2015). Smartphone use and work–-
home interference: The moderating role of social norms and employee work en-
gagement. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 88, 155–177.

*Diebig, M., Bormann, K. C., & Rowold, J. (2017). Day-level transformational leadership
and followers’ daily level of stress: A moderated mediation model of team coopera-
tion, role conflict, and type of communication. European Journal of Work and
Organizational Psychology, 26, 234–249.

*Dollard, M. F., & Idris, M. A. (2017). Climate congruence: How espoused psychosocial
safety climate and enacted managerial support affect emotional exhaustion and work
engagement. Safety Science, 96, 132–142.

*Dong, Y., Liao, H., Chuang, A., Zhou, J., & Campbell, E. M. (2015). Fostering employee
service creativity: Joint effects of customer empowering behaviors and supervisory
empowering leadership. Journal of Applied Psychology, 100, 1364–1380.

Einarsen, S., Aasland, M. S., & Skogstad, A. (2007). Destructive leadership behaviour: A
definition and conceptual model. The Leadership Quarterly, 18(3), 207–216.

*Ellis, A. M., Bauer, T. N., Erdogan, B., & Truxillo, D. M. (2018). Daily perceptions of
relationship quality with leaders: Implications for follower well-being. Work & Stress,
1–18.

Enders, C. K. (2010). Applied missing data analysis. New York: Guilford Publications.
Fisher, C. D., & To, M. L. (2012). Using experience sampling methodology in organiza-

tional behavior. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 33, 865–877.
Fleeson, W. (2001). Toward a structure-and process-integrated view of personality: Traits

as density distributions of states. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80(6),
1011–1027. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.80.6.1011.

Fleeson, W., & Noftle, E. E. (2011). Personality research. In M. R. Mehl, & T. S. Conner
(Eds.). Handbook of research methods for studying daily life (pp. 525–538). New York:
Guilford Press.

*Ford, M. T., Wang, Y., Jin, J., & Eisenberger, R. (2018). Chronic and episodic anger and
gratitude toward the organization: Relationships with organizational and supervisor
supportiveness and extrarole behavior. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology,
23(2), 175.

*Foulk, T. A., Lanaj, K., Tu, M. H., Erez, A., & Archambeau, L. (2018). Heavy is the head
that wears the crown: An actor-centric approach to daily psychological power, abu-
sive leader behavior, and perceived incivility. Academy of Management Journal, 61,
661–684.

Gabriel, A. S., Podsakoff, N. P., Beal, D. J., Scott, B. A., Sonnentag, S., Trougakos, J. P., &
Butts, M. M. (2018). Experience sampling methods: a discussion of critical trends and
considerations for scholarly advancement. Organizational Research Methods,
1094428118802626.

*Germeys, L., & De Gieter, S. (2017). Clarifying the dynamic interrelation of conflicts
between the work and home domain and counterproductive work behavior.
European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 26(3), 457–467.

Giambatista, R. C. (2004). Jumping through hoops: A longitudinal study of leader life
cycles in the NBA. The Leadership Quarterly, 15(5), 607–624.

*Goh, Z., Ilies, R., & Wilson, K. S. (2015). Supportive supervisors improve employees’
daily lives: The role supervisors play in the impact of daily workload on life sa-
tisfaction via work–family conflict. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 89, 65–73.3 * indicates reviewed article

T.K. Kelemen, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101344

17

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0125
https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206314532691
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0190
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.80.6.1011
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0235


Graham, J. W. (2009). Missing data analysis: Making it work in the real world. Annual
Review of Psychology, 60(1), 549–576.

*Hetland, J., Hetland, H., Bakker, A. B., & Demerouti, E. (2018). Daily transformational
leadership and employee job crafting: The role of promotion focus. European
Management Journal, 36, 746–756.

*Hetland, J., Hetland, H., Bakker, A. B., Demerouti, E., Andreassen, C. S., & Pallesen, S.
(2015). Psychological need fulfillment as a mediator of the relationship between
transformational leadership and positive job attitudes. Career Development
International, 20(5), 464–481.

Hoch, J. E., Bommer, W. H., Dulebohn, J. H., & Wu, D. (2018). Do ethical, authentic, and
servant leadership explain variance above and beyond transformational leadership?
A meta-analysis. Journal of Management, 44(2), 501–529.

Hoption, C. (2016). It does not add up: Comparing episodic and general leadership rat-
ings. Leadership, 12(4), 491–503.

Howell, J. M., & Avolio, B. J. (1993). Transformational leadership, transactional lea-
dership, locus of control, and support for innovation: Key predictors of consolidated-
business-unit performance. Journal of applied psychology, 78(6), 891.

*Johnson, R. E., Lanaj, K., & Barnes, C. M. (2014). The good and bad of being fair: Effects
of procedural and interpersonal justice behaviors on regulatory resources. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 99, 635.

*Johnson, R. E., Venus, M., Lanaj, K., Mao, C., & Chang, C. H. (2012). Leader identity as
an antecedent of the frequency and consistency of transformational, consideration,
and abusive leadership behaviors. Journal of Applied Psychology, 97, 1262–1272.

*Jones, M. C., & Johnston, D. (2013). Do mood and the receipt of work-based support
influence nurse perceived quality of care delivery? A behavioural diary study. Journal
of Clinical Nursing, 22(5–6), 890–901.

*Jones, M. C., & Johnston, D. W. (2012). Does clinical incident seriousness and receipt of
work-based support influence mood experienced by nurses at work? A behavioural
diary study. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 49(8), 978–987.

*Judge, T. A., Scott, B. A., & Ilies, R. (2006). Hostility, job attitudes, and workplace de-
viance: test of a multilevel model. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91, 126–138.

Kalish, Y., & Luria, G. (2016). Leadership emergence over time in short-lived groups:
Integrating expectations states theory with temporal person-perception and self-ser-
ving bias. Journal of Applied Psychology, 101(10), 1474.

*Kelloway, E. K., Weigand, H., McKee, M. C., & Das, H. (2013). Positive leadership and
employee well-being. Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies, 20, 107–117.

Koning, L. F., & Van Kleef, G. A. (2015). How leaders’ emotional displays shape followers’
organizational citizenship behavior. The Leadership Quarterly, 26, 489–501.

*Kudesia, R. S., & Reina, C. S. (2019). Does interacting with trustworthy people enhance
mindfulness? An experience sampling study of mindfulness in everyday situations.
PloS one, 14(4), e0215810.

*Kuonath, A., Specht, J., Kühnel, J., Pachler, D., & Frey, D. (2017). Keeping up day-
specific effects of transformational leadership: the role of followers’ emotion reg-
ulation. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 26(6), 828–843.

*Lam, C. F., Lee, C., & Sui, Y. (2019). Say it as it is: Consequences of voice directness,
voice politeness, and voicer credibility on voice endorsement. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 104(5), 642–658.

Lambert, L. S., Tepper, B. J., Carr, J. C., Holt, D. T., & Barelka, A. J. (2012). Forgotten but
not gone: an examination of fit between leader consideration and initiating structure
needed and received. Journal of Applied Psychology, 97, 913–930.

*Lanaj, K., Foulk, T. A., & Erez, A. (2019). Energizing leaders via self-reflection: A within-
person field experiment. Journal of Applied Psychology, 104, 1–18.

*Lanaj, K., & Jennings, R. E. (2019). Putting leaders in a bad mood: The affective costs of
helping followers with personal problems. Journal of Applied Psychology. (in press).

*Lanaj, K., Johnson, R. E., & Lee, S. M. (2016). Benefits of transformational behaviors for
leaders: A daily investigation of leader behaviors and need fulfillment. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 101, 237.

*Lavy, S., Littman-Ovadia, H., & Boiman-Meshita, M. (2017). The wind beneath my
wings: Effects of social support on daily use of character strengths at work. Journal of
Career Assessment, 25(4), 703–714.

Lemoine, G. J., Hartnell, C. A., & Leroy, H. (2019). Taking stock of moral approaches to
leadership: An Integrative review of ethical, authentic, and servant leadership.
Academy of Management Annals, 13(1), 148–187.

*Li, J., Barnes, C. M., Yam, K. C., Guarana, C. L., & Wang, L. (in press). Do not like it when
you need it the most: Examining the effect of manager ego depletion on managerial
voice endorsement. Journal of Organizational Behavior.

*Liao, Z., Liu, W., Li, X., & Song, Z. (2018). Give and take: An episodic perspective on
leader-member exchange. Journal of Applied Psychology, 104, 34.

*Liao, Z., Yam, K. C., Johnson, R. E., Liu, W., & Song, Z. (2018). Cleansing my abuse: A
reparative response model of perpetrating abusive supervisor behavior. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 103(9), 1039–1056.

Lin, S. H. J., Ma, J., & Johnson, R. E. (2016). When ethical leader behavior breaks bad:
How ethical leader behavior can turn abusive via ego depletion and moral licensing.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 101, 815–830.

*Liu, Y., Wang, M., Chang, C. H., Shi, J., Zhou, L., & Shao, R. (2015). Work–family
conflict, emotional exhaustion, and displaced aggression toward others: The mod-
erating roles of workplace interpersonal conflict and perceived managerial family
support. Journal of Applied Psychology, 100, 793–808.

*Matta, F. K., Erol-Korkmaz, H. T., Johnson, R. E., & Biçaksiz, P. (2014). Significant work
events and counterproductive work behavior: The role of fairness, emotions, and
emotion regulation. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 35, 920–944.

*Matta, F. K., Scott, B. A., Colquitt, J. A., Koopman, J., & Passantino, L. G. (2017). Is
consistently unfair better than sporadically fair? An investigation of justice variability
and stress. Academy of Management Journal, 60, 743–770.

McClean, S. T., Barnes, C. M., Courtright, S. H., & Johnson, R. E. (in press). Resetting the
clock on dynamic leader behaviors: A conceptual integration and agenda for future

research. Academy of Management Annals.
McCormick, B. W., Reeves, C. J., Downes, P. E., Li, N., & Ilies, R. (in press). Scientific

Contributions of Within-Person Research in Management: Making the Juice Worth
the Squeeze. Journal of Management.

McNeish, D., & Kelley, K. (2019). Fixed effects models versus mixed effects models for
clustered data: Reviewing the approaches, disentangling the differences, and making
recommendations. Psychological Methods, 24(1), 20.

*Meier, L. L., & Gross, S. (2015). Episodes of incivility between subordinates and su-
pervisors: Examining the role of self-control and time with an interaction-record
diary study. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 36, 1096–1113.

Miscenko, D., Guenter, H., & Day, D. V. (2017). Am I a leader? Examining leader identity
development over time. The Leadership Quarterly, 28(5), 605–620.

Mundlak, Y. (1978). On the pooling of time series and cross section data. Econometrica,
46, 69–85.

*Myrden, S. E., & Kelloway, E. K. (2015). Leading to customer loyalty: A daily test of the
service-profit chain. Journal of Services Marketing, 29(7), 585–598.

Newman, D. A. (2014). Missing data five practical guidelines. Organizational Research
Methods, 17(4), 372–411.

*Nielsen, K., & Cleal, B. (2010). Predicting flow at work: Investigating the activities and
job characteristics that predict flow states at work. Journal of Occupational Health
Psychology, 15(2), 180.

*Nielsen, K., & Cleal, B. (2011). Under which conditions do middle managers exhibit
transformational leadership behaviors? – An experience sampling method study on
the predictors of transformational leadership behaviors. The Leadership Quarterly, 22,
344–352.

Nielsen, K., & Daniels, K. (2012). Enhancing team leaders’ well-being states and challenge
experiences during organizational change: A randomized, controlled study. Human
Relations, 65(9), 1207–1231.

Ohly, S., & Gochmann, V. (2017). 12. Diary studies in leadership. Handbook of methods
in leadership research, 296.

Owens, B. P., Yam, K. C., Bednar, J. S., Mao, J., & Hart, D. W. (2019). The impact of leader
moral humility on follower moral self-efficacy and behavior. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 104, 146–163.

*Pluut, H., Ilies, R., Curşeu, P. L., & Liu, Y. (2018). Social support at work and at home:
Dual-buffering effects in the work-family conflict process. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 146, 1–13.

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Lee, J. Y., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2003). Common method
biases in behavioral research: A critical review of the literature and recommended
remedies. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88(5), 879–903.

*Qin, X., Huang, M., Johnson, R. E., Hu, Q., & Ju, D. (2018). The short-lived benefits of
abusive supervisory behavior for actors: An investigation of recovery and work en-
gagement. Academy of Management Journal, 61, 1951–1975.

Reis, H. T. (2012). Why researchers should think “real-world”: A conceptual rationale. In
M. R. Mehl, & T. Connor (Eds.). Handbook of research methods for studying daily life
(pp. 3–21). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Reis, H. T., & Gable, S. L. (2000). Event-sampling and other methods for studying ev-
eryday experience. In H. T. Reis, & C. M. Judd (Eds.). Handbook of research methods in
social and personality psychology (pp. 190–222). New York: Cambridge University
Press.

Robinson, M. D., & Clore, G. L. (2002). Belief and feeling: evidence for an accessibility
model of emotional self-report. Psychological Bulletin, 128(6), 934–960. https://doi.
org/10.1037/0033-2909.128.6.934.

*Rodríguez-Carvajal, R., Herrero, M., van Dierendonck, D., de Rivas, S., & Moreno-
Jiménez, B. (2019). Servant leadership and goal attainment through meaningful life
and vitality: a diary study. Journal of Happiness Studies, 20(2), 499–521.

Rosen, C. C., Simon, L. S., Gajendran, R. S., Johnson, R. E., Lee, H. W., & Lin, S. H. J.
(2019). Boxed in by your inbox: Implications of daily e-mail demands for managers’
leadership behaviors. Journal of Applied Psychology, 104(1), 19–33.

*Schilpzand, P., Houston, L., III, & Cho, J. (2018). Not too tired to be proactive: Daily
empowering leadership spurs next-morning employee proactivity as moderated by
nightly sleep quality. Academy of Management Journal, 61, 2367–2387.

Schurer, S., & Yong, J. (2012). Personality, well-being and the marginal utility of income:
What can we learn from random coefficient models? Health, Econometrics and Data Group
(HEDG) Working Papers. Department of Economics: University of York, York, United
Kingdom.

Schwartz, N. (2012). Why researchers should think “real-time”: A cognitive rationale. In
M. R. Mehl, & T. Connor (Eds.). Handbook of research methods for studying daily life
(pp. 22–42). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Schyns, B., & Schilling, J. (2013). How bad are the effects of bad leaders? A meta-analysis
of destructive leadership and its outcomes. The Leadership Quarterly, 24(1), 138–158.

*Scott, B. A., Colquitt, J. A., Paddock, E. L., & Judge, T. A. (2010). A daily investigation of
the role of manager empathy on employee well-being. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 113, 127–140.

*Scott, B. A., Garza, A. S., Conlon, D. E., & Kim, Y. J. (2014). Why do managers act fairly
in the first place? A daily investigation of “hot” and “cold” motives and discretion.
Academy of Management Journal, 57, 1571–1591.

Seifert, C. F., & Yukl, G. (2010). Effects of repeated multi-source feedback on the influence
behavior and effectiveness of managers: A field experiment. The Leadership Quarterly,
21(5), 856–866.

Shamir, B. (2011). Leadership takes time: Some implications of (not) taking time seriously
in leadership research. The Leadership Quarterly, 22(2), 307–315.

*Sherf, E. N., Venkataramani, V., & Gajendran, R. S. (2019). Too busy to be fair? Academy
of Management Journal: The effect of workload and rewards on managers’ justice
rule adherence.

*Shockley, K. M., & Allen, T. D. (2013). Episodic work–family conflict, cardiovascular
indicators, and social support: An experience sampling approach. Journal of

T.K. Kelemen, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101344

18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0490
https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.128.6.934
https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.128.6.934
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0545
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0545
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0555


Occupational Health Psychology, 18(3), 262.
Sonnentag, S., Dormann, C., & Demerouti, E. (2010). Not all days are created equal: The

concept of state work engagement. In A. B. Bakker, & M. P. Leiter (Eds.). Work en-
gagement: A handbook of essential theory and research (pp. 25–38). New York:
Psychology Press.

*Stocker, D., Jacobshagen, N., Krings, R., Pfister, I. B., & Semmer, N. K. (2014).
Appreciative leadership and employee well-being in everyday working life. German
Journal of Human Resource Management, 28, 73–95.

*Tariq, H., & Ding, D. (2018). Why am I still doing this job? The examination of family
motivation on employees’ work behaviors under abusive supervision. Personnel
Review, 47(2), 378–402.

*Tepper, B. J., Dimotakis, N., Lambert, L. S., Koopman, J., Matta, F. K., Man Park, H., &
Goo, W. (2018). Examining follower responses to transformational leadership from a
dynamic, person–environment fit perspective. Academy of Management Journal, 61,
1343–1368.

Tepper, B. J., Simon, L., & Park, H. M. (2017). Abusive supervision. Annual Review of
Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior, 4, 123–152.

*Tims, M., Bakker, A. B., & Xanthopoulou, D. (2011). Do transformational leaders en-
hance their followers’ daily work engagement? The Leadership Quarterly, 22, 121–131.

*To, M. L., Fisher, C. D., Ashkanasy, N. M., & Rowe, P. A. (2012). Within-person re-
lationships between mood and creativity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 97, 599.

*Tomprou, M., & Nikolaou, I. (2013). Exploring the role of social influence in promise
beliefs and information acquisition among newcomers. European Journal of Work and
Organizational Psychology, 22(4), 408–422.

*Tsai, W. C., & Chen, H. Y. (2017). A multilevel investigation of antecedents of employee
positive affective displays: The roles of customer negative affective displays and
employee perceived supervisory support. European Journal of Work and Organizational
Psychology, 26(3), 385–398.

Uy, M. A., Foo, M. D., & Aguinis, H. (2010). Using experience sampling methodology to
advance entrepreneurship theory and research. Organizational Research Methods, 13,
31–54.

*Van Dijke, M., Leunissen, J. M., Wildschut, T., & Sedikides, C. (2019). Nostalgia pro-
motes intrinsic motivation and effort in the presence of low interactional justice.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 150, 46–61.

Van Kleef, G. A., Homan, A. C., Beersma, B., Van Knippenberg, D., Van Knippenberg, B., &
Damen, F. (2009). Searing sentiment or cold calculation? The effects of leader
emotional displays on team performance depend on follower epistemic motivation.
Academy of Management Journal, 52, 562–580.

Van Knippenberg, D., & Sitkin, S. B. (2013). A critical assessment of charismatic—-
transformational leadership research: Back to the drawing board? The Academy of
Management Annals, 7(1), 1–60.

Venus, M., Johnson, R. E., Zhang, S., Wang, X. H., & Lanaj, K. (2018). Seeing the big
picture: A within-person examination of leader construal level and vision

communication. Journal of Management, 45(7), 2666–2684.
Visser, V. A., van Knippenberg, D., Van Kleef, G. A., & Wisse, B. (2013). How leader

displays of happiness and sadness influence follower performance: Emotional con-
tagion and creative versus analytical performance. The Leadership Quarterly, 24,
172–188.

*Vogel, R. M., & Mitchell, M. S. (2017). The motivational effects of diminished self-esteem
for employees who experience abusive supervision. Journal of Management, 43,
2218–2251.

*Volmer, J. (2015). Followers’ daily reactions to social conflicts with supervisors: The
moderating role of core self-evaluations and procedural justice perceptions. The
Leadership Quarterly, 26, 719–731.

*Weiss, M., Razinskas, S., Backmann, J., & Hoegl, M. (2018). Authentic leadership and
leaders’ mental well-being: An experience sampling study. The Leadership Quarterly,
29, 309–321.

Wheeler, L., & Reis, H. T. (1991). Self-recording of everyday life events: Origins, types,
and uses. Journal of Personality, 59, 339–354.

*Wijewardena, N., Härtel, C. E., & Samaratunge, R. (2017). Using humor and boosting
emotions: An affect-based study of managerial humor, employees’ emotions and
psychological capital. Human Relations, 70, 1316–1341.

*Xanthopoulou, D., Dakker, A. B., Demerouti, E., & Schaufeli, W. B. (2012). A diary study
on the happy worker: How job resources relate to positive emotions and personal
resources. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 21(4), 489–517.

*Yagil, D., & Medler-Liraz, H. (2014). Feel free, be yourself: Authentic leadership, emo-
tional expression, and employee authenticity. Journal of Leadership & Organizational
Studies, 21, 59–70.

*Yang, J., & Diefendorff, J. M. (2009). The relations of daily counterproductive workplace
behavior with emotions, situational antecedents, and personality moderators: A diary
study in Hong Kong. Personnel Psychology, 62, 259–295.

*Yeung, E., & Shen, W. (2019). Can pride be a vice and virtue at work? Journal of
Organizational Behavior: Associations between authentic and hubristic pride and
leadership behaviors.

*Zacher, H. (2016). Within-person relationships between daily individual and job char-
acteristics and daily manifestations of career adaptability. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 92, 105–115.

*Zacher, H., & Wilden, R. G. (2014). A daily diary study on ambidextrous leadership and
self-reported employee innovation. Journal of Occupational and Organizational
Psychology, 87, 813–820.

Zhang, X., & Bartol, K. M. (2010). Linking empowering leadership and employee crea-
tivity: The influence of psychological empowerment, intrinsic motivation, and crea-
tive process engagement. Academy of Management Journal, 53(1), 107–128.

Zhu, W., Avolio, B. J., & Walumbwa, F. O. (2009). Moderating role of follower char-
acteristics with transformational leadership and follower work engagement. Group &
Organization Management, 34(5), 590–619.

T.K. Kelemen, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101344

19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0570
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0570
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0570
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0575
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0575
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0575
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0595
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0595
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0600
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0600
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0605
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0605
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0610
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0610
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0610
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0615
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0615
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0615
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0615
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0625
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0625
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0625
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0630
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0630
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0630
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0635
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0635
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0635
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0635
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0640
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0640
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0640
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0645
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0645
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0645
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0650
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0650
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0650
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0650
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0655
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0655
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0655
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0660
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0660
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0660
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0675
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0675
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0675
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0680
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0680
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0685
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0685
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0685
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0690
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0690
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0690
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0695
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0695
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0695
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0700
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0700
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0700
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0705
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0705
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0705
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0710
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0710
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0710
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0715
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0715
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0715
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0725
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0725
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0725
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0730
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0730
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30820-8/rf0730


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

The Leadership Quarterly

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua

Review

Leading teams in the digital age: Four perspectives on technology and what
they mean for leading teams
Lindsay Larson⁎, Leslie A. DeChurch
Department of Communication Studies, Northwestern University, United States of America

A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords:
Team leadership
Digital technology
Team effectiveness

A B S T R A C T

Digital technologies are changing the nature of teamwork in ways that have important implications for lea-
dership. Though conceptually rich and multi-disciplinary, much of the burgeoning work on technology has not
been fully integrated into the leadership literature. To fill this gap, we organize existing work on leadership and
technology, outlining four perspectives: (1) technology as context, (2) technology as sociomaterial, (3) tech-
nology as creation medium, and (4) technology as teammate. Each technology perspective makes assumptions
about how technologies affect teams and the needs for team leadership. Within each perspective, we detail
current work on leading teams. This section takes us from virtual teams to new vistas posed by leading online
communities, crowds, peer production groups, flash teams, human-robot teams, and human-artificial in-
telligence teams. We identify 12 leadership implications arising from the ways digital technologies affect or-
ganizing. We then leverage our review to identify directions for future leadership research and practice.

Introduction

The digital age has changed the nature of work in ways that were
unimaginable even a decade ago (Barley, Bechky, & Milliken, 2017).
Technological advances have shifted many people from working inside
formal organizations to working as loosely connected members of a
larger community, such as the virtual office employees across major
industries (Joshi, Lazarova, & Liao, 2009). Technological advances
have given rise to the gig economy, where individuals sell their services
directly to the market (Petriglieri, Ashford, & Wrzesniewski, 2019).
Crowd workers contract their time and skills on an as-needed basis on e-
commerce sites like Upwork, an online platform that “expertly matches
professionals and agencies to businesses seeking specialized talent”
(Upwork, 2019), and MTurk, a “crowdsourcing marketplace that makes
it easier for individuals and businesses to outsource their processes and
jobs to a distributed workforce who can perform these tasks virtually”
(MTurk, 2018). There are many ways digital technologies are trans-
forming the nature of work. The permeation of digital technologies is
not changing the widespread organization of work into teams, but it is
changing the nature of teamwork. Consider these examples:

• Organizations from Netflix to NASA regularly use online tourna-
ments to source innovation (Dissanayake, Zhang, Yasar, & Nerur,
2018; Lifshitz-Assaf, 2018).

• Internet sites like Upwork allow Fortune 500 companies to hire
freelancers from around the world to perform skilled and specialized
work (Green, Walker, Alabulththim, Smith, & Phillips, 2018).
• The free online encyclopedia Wikipedia is maintained by volunteers
who produce a product with comparable accuracy to traditional
encyclopedias (Giles, 2005).
• Robots now routinely assist physicians and nurses during a wide
range of surgeries (Lanfranco, Castellanos, Desai, & Meyers, 2004).

Each example describes work that has been enhanced in some way
through advances in computing. All four examples involve teams per-
forming work that has and continues to change with advances in digital
tools. In the cases of Upwork and Wikipedia, the internet has enabled a
new kind of organization: the online community, where relationships
are informal and participation is voluntary. Although contributions to
Wikipedia are unpaid, contributions to Upwork are paid at a negotiated
rate. On Upwork, individuals can create a team project (i.e., “enable
teams”) and staff the team with contractors located around the world.
Traditional organizations like Netflix and NASA are leveraging these
advances to help them innovate. All four examples demonstrate the
exciting ways technology is transforming the basic nature of teamwork
(Fan & Yen, 2004).

This fundamental transformation of teamwork vis a vis technology
has important implications for leadership. Teams are using an

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101377
Received 16 November 2018; Received in revised form 16 December 2019; Accepted 19 December 2019

⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Communication Studies, 2240 Campus Drive, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60201, United States of America.
E-mail address: lindsaylarson2020@u.northwestern.edu (L. Larson).

The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101377

Available online 13 January 2020
1048-9843/ © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

T

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/10489843
https://www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101377
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101377
mailto:lindsaylarson2020@u.northwestern.edu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101377
http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101377&domain=pdf


increasingly sophisticated array of technologies to work together - re-
latively basic messaging and video conferencing systems have been
joined by enterprise social media (e.g., Slack, GroupMe) and colla-
borative editing suites (e.g., Google Drive, Microsoft Teams). Though
technologies have been shifting the landscape of teams for some time,
these shifts are becoming more transformative. Technologies have, for
some time, enabled individuals to collaborate in teams over great dis-
tances. They are now shaping who comes together in teams and al-
lowing teams to scale up in much larger networks of teams. If the 20th
century saw the rise of self-managing work teams (Stewart & Manz,
1995), the 21st century introduces us to teams with crowd workers,
paid or unpaid workers who organize via the internet, operate outside
formal organizations, and may never meet in person (Dow et al., 2011;
Kittur et al., 2013).

Technologies are also creating new kinds of team members.
Whereas most basic definitions of teams begin with “two or more in-
dividuals” (Kozlowski & Ilgen, 2006), the digital age invites organiza-
tional scholars to rethink what constitutes a team member. Rapid ad-
vances in robotics (Burke, Murphy, Rogers, Lumelsky, & Scholtz, 2004;
Chui, Manyika, & Miremadi, 2016; Manyika et al., 2017) and Artificial
Intelligence (AI; Chui et al., 2018; Yen et al., 2001) are introducing
technologies to teams as autonomous team members. Although robots
and algorithms have long been replacing some individuals (e.g., robots
used in manufacturing) and augmenting the capabilities of others (e.g.,
surgical robots; Van Den Berg et al., 2010), we are fast approaching a
time when autonomous agents are motivated beings working alongside
their human counterparts.

The popular press is replete with futuristic thinking on the changing
nature of work (i.e., Lund et al., 2019; Marr, 2019; Schwartz, Collins,
Stockton, Wagner, & Walsh, 2017), and there is great demand for
managerial training to equip leaders for the digital age. How managers
leverage AI may well be the major differentiator between those who
succeed and those who fail at leading in the age of AI: “the advances of
brilliant machines will astound us, but they will transform the lives of
senior executives only if managerial advances enable them to”
(Dewhurst & Willmott, 2014). The success of teams in settings that span
the many industries being transformed by technology - healthcare,
entrepreneurship, space exploration, entertainment - hinges on con-
current advances in leadership.

The central premise of this review is that the digital transformation
of work makes leadership even more critical to team effectiveness in a
variety of ways. Furthermore, how we view technology's role in teams
creates different implications for leadership. In order to more con-
cretely understand the leadership implications of technologies, we re-
viewed the research on team leadership as it relates to digital tech-
nology. In doing so, we identified four perspectives on the role of
technology in teams. These four perspectives are depicted in Fig. 1,
along with an approximate timeline of when we started to see research
reflective of each technology view. Each of these views makes a distinct
core assertion about the role of leadership in supporting teamwork.

There have been a number of excellent recent reviews on team
leadership (c.f., Burke, Diaz-Granados, & Salas, 2011; Kozlowski, Mak,
& Chao, 2016), though there has not been a review explicitly focused on
the implications of technology for team leadership. Given the changes
in teamwork described in our opening, such a review is sorely needed to
highlight the specific ways that technology can condition, create, and
shape team leadership. The central aim of our review is to bring digital
technology more clearly into focus in order to understand the leader-
ship implications of leading in the digital age.

Our review juxtaposes technology and team leadership. We review
key findings from technology-rich domains as they relate to team lea-
dership in order to highlight the leadership implications stemming from
each technology perspective. In doing so, we unveil new insights about
leading teams in an age of unprecedented technological transformation.
Our primary contributions are twofold.

Fig. 1 previews the key components of our review. In the center, we

depict the four perspectives on digital technology we identified in our
review, we label these: digital technology as a team context, digital
technology as sociomaterial team practices, digital technology as team
creation medium, and digital technology as a teammate. We also note
the approximate timeframe when prominent theorizing about technol-
ogies began to adopt each of the four perspectives included in our re-
view. Along the bottom of Fig. 1 we have listed some examples of the
terms used in research examining the ways emerging technologies af-
fect teams. Starting from the left, we list one of the earliest terms
“computer-supported groups.” Though we begin our review in earnest
after the turn of the century, we included this term for completeness as
this was a period that ignited interest in teams and technology. Around
the turn of the century, substantial attention was paid to “virtual teams”
whose members used technologies to collaborate remotely. On the
bottom of Fig. 1 we have listed some examples of the focal technologies
that scholars had in mind as they studied technology and teams. The far
right of the figure denotes the leadership findings and implications that
comprise the bulk of our review. For each technology perspective, we
review the research that relates to team leadership, summarizing the
leadership implications that come into focus when we take on each of
the four technology perspectives. We present the timeline as a guide for
understanding the loose temporal associations between theorizing on
team leadership, technology, and emerging team forms. Though we
note that our review of findings does not proceed chronologically; ra-
ther we organized findings according to the technology perspective
reflected in the study. For each technology perspective, we review
findings as they relate to team leadership.

Research on team leadership generally emphasizes two dimensions:
leadership functions and leadership forms. The first dimension is team
leadership functions (McGrath, 1962; Zaccaro, Rittman, & Marks, 2001).
This dimension highlights the need for leaders to ensure the core needs
of the team are satisfied “with the ultimate aim of fostering team ef-
fectiveness” (Morgeson, DeRue, & Karam, 2010). Though taxonomies
differ, most encompass the need for teams to develop strong affective
emergent states like trust and cohesion, the need to develop cognitive
emergent states like shared mental models and transactive memory
systems, and the need to enact behavioral integration processes. Leader-
ship forms describe the pattern or topology of how leadership is carried
out by the team. Some common team leadership forms include hier-
archical, shared, distributed, and rotated leadership (Contractor,
DeChurch, Carson, Carter, & Keegan, 2012). Research shows collective
forms of leadership are more beneficial than hierarchical forms in
promoting team effectiveness (D'Innocenzo, Mathieu, & Kukenberger,
2016; Nicolaides et al., 2014; Wang, Waldman, & Zhang, 2014).

Based on these two dimensions, team leadership can be thought of as
actions taken by one or more team members to ensure that team needs
are being met. Zaccaro et al. (2001) summarize a number of team
leadership actions: recognizing and constructing team problems, gen-
erating, planning, and implementing solutions to those problems, and
coordinating and monitoring the implementation of those solutions.
Together, leadership functions and forms provide a useful framework
for understanding leadership in the digital age.

We review the findings related to team leadership that explicitly
focus on some aspect of digital technologies. We began our review by
searching for articles with keywords such as “leader” and “technology”.
We knew that our literature search would need to take place across
disciplines as the research on leadership and technology is cross-dis-
ciplinary and much of the human-technology interaction work is in fact
occurring in disciplines other than the organizational sciences. Thus, we
also skimmed the abstracts of articles with the terms “group”, “team”,
“collective”, and other group-related terms to see how other disciplines
might be talking and thinking about team leadership and technology. In
reviewing these studies, we saw evidence of four perspectives on
technology that serve as the major categories of our review.

The first two perspectives are prevalent in technology studies.
Technology as context views technology and social practices as distinct

L. Larson and L.A. DeChurch The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101377

2



entities. The technology is a situational context that creates conditions
that affect social practices. The second view, technology as sociomaterial,
explores “the ways that [a technology's] physical and/or digital mate-
rials are arranged into particular forms that endure across differences in
place and time” (Leonardi, 2012, p. 29), and views material aspects of
technology and social practices as mutually dependent ensembles such
that there is “an inherent inseparability between the technical and the
social” (Orlikowski & Scott, 2008, p. 434). Most current work on team
leadership takes one of these two perspectives on technology.

The third perspective, technology as team creation medium, explores
the ways that technology platforms are shaping who forms teams and
how they form them. Research in this area focuses on the role of
technology in the initial formation and later reformation of teams. The
prevalence of large online communities and new ways of organizing are
expanding the role of team leaders, and in some cases, replacing leader
activities with algorithmic control. A fourth perspective is emerging in
which technology is a motivated social being: technology as teammate.
With the rise in automation in our everyday lives, we are becoming
dependent on our technological teammates at home and at the office.
Intelligent machines are helping us pilot our airplanes, select new
employees, and crunch numbers in order to make organizational
steering decisions, just to name a few examples. This perspective will
influence how leaders manage team members, both humans and in-
telligent agents, and has important ethical considerations for leaders as
this perspective of teaming becomes increasingly prevalent in our or-
ganizations. In the next section, we review scholarship on digital
technologies and team leadership in order to foster greater linkages
between the two and to highlight the key leadership implications sug-
gested by work in each domain.

A review of technology and team leadership

Table 1 provides a useful guide for the review that follows. We
summarize each of the four technology perspectives and their im-
plications for leadership. Table 1 allows us to compare and contrast the
perspectives in terms of: (1) how digital technologies relate to team-
work and (2) the leadership needs created by technology when viewed
from each perspective. We begin by considering research conducted
from the first technology perspective.

Technology as context

The first area of research on technology and organizing considers
technology as team context. This view holds that technology has fixed
features that set up the context in which team processes take place
(Table 1). According to this view, when teams use digital technologies
to interact with one another, the technology is an important aspect of
the leadership situation. According to this view, we would understand a
distributed team convening via videoconference by looking separately
at the team process behavior on the one hand and the features of the
video conference system (e.g., clarity, refresh rate, pan-tilt-zoom,
audio-video timing) on the other. In this view, technology is separate
from the team; there are teams who use technology and those who do
not. There are teams who use information-rich technologies and those
who use less rich tools. Technology as context considers technology as
having features that determine important aspects of the leadership si-
tuation.

The context perspective of technology in teams grows out of a long-
standing view of teamwork and leadership as situated in context.
Reviews of context in psychological leadership research (Liden &
Antonakis, 2009; Maloney, Bresman, Zellmer-Bruhn, & Beaver, 2016)
demonstrate a long history of context as a consideration in the study of
teams and leadership. One area of research that took a technology as
context perspective in its examination of leadership is that of E-lea-
dership (Cascio & Shurygailo, 2003; Zaccaro & Bader, 2003). E-lea-
dership theorizes the leadership needs of those “who conduct many of
the processes of leadership largely through electronic channels” to
begin to study leadership in virtually collaborating teams (also Avolio,
Kahai, & Dodge, 2000; Avolio, Sosik, Kahai, & Baker, 2014; Hedlund,
Ilgen, & Hollenbeck, 1998; Johnson, Suriya, Yoon, Berrett, & La Fleur,
2002; Sosik, Kahai, & Avolio, 1998; Tyran, Tyran, & Shepherd, 2003).

Other work advocates the need for greater attention to context in
leadership research in general (Johns, 2006, 2017, 2018). Johns sug-
gests that context is often mishandled in organizational behavior re-
search and offers useful dimensions through which to understand lea-
dership in context: the omnibus context and the discrete context. The
omnibus context is the overarching context in which leadership occurs
and represents the “who, where, when, and why” of the context. The
discrete context represents the task, social, and physical context of the
team. The omnibus context encompasses the discrete context. These

Fig. 1. Four perspectives on digital technology with implications for leading teams.

L. Larson and L.A. DeChurch The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101377

3



two dimensions of context are proposed to help scholars think about
how their study of context and the generalization of contextual findings
can occur in a more rigorous and structured way. In thinking about
teams in the digital age, new technologies influencing leadership pro-
cesses are part of the larger, “omnibus” context, the “who, where,
when, and why” of the context.

Similar to Johns' dimensions of organizational context, Morgeson
and colleagues suggest a model for understanding team leadership
functions in which one must understand the context of the team, the
organization, and the environment in order to understand leadership
processes and subsequent team effectiveness (Morgeson, Lindoerfer, &
Loring, 2010). Oc (2018) builds directly on the Johns (2006) frame-
work for understanding organizational context and proposes a frame-
work for understanding leadership and team context. Oc proposes that
the omnibus and discrete contexts interact with leadership influencing
processes (i.e., leader behaviors, follower attributions, leader-member
exchange, etc.) and leadership outcomes (i.e., effectiveness, cognition,
attitude, and behavior). In sum, technology as context stems from a
popular and well-developed perspective of research on the context of
leadership in general.

Much of this work on technology as context uses the notion of team
virtuality. Team virtuality is comprised of: “(a) the extent to which team
members use virtual tools to coordinate and execute team processes…
(b) the amount of informational value provided by such tools, and (c)
the synchronicity of team member virtual interaction” (Kirkman &
Mathieu, 2005, p. 702). Another definition of virtuality includes geo-
graphic dispersion, electronic dependence, structural dynamism, and
national diversity (Gibson & Gibbs, 2006). Scholarship on virtuality
holds technology as having fixed objective properties that constitute the
context in which leadership occurs. These definitions of virtuality serve
to underscore the emphasis of technology as a piece of the environment
in which organizing occurs, which is core to work taking viewing
technology as a context for teamwork.

Work examining technology as a context in teams began with the
study of computer-supported work groups in the 1990's (i.e., Constant,
Sproull, & Kiesler, 1996; Zack & McKenney, 1995). The work on com-
puter-supported work groups morphed into what we know of today as
“virtual teams” (Bell & Kozlowski, 2002; Dulebohn & Hoch, 2017), also
sometimes referred to as global virtual or globally-distributed teams as
well (Gajendran & Joshi, 2012; Kayworth & Leidner, 2002; Kotlarsky &
Oshri, 2005; Oshri, Van Fenema, & Kotlarsky, 2008). Virtual teams are
defined as “groups of geographically and/or organizationally dispersed
coworkers that are assembled using a combination of telecommunica-
tions and information technologies to accomplish an organizational
task” (Townsend, DeMarie, & Hendrickson, 1998, p. 17). As a guide,
Table 2 includes a list of definitions for some of the various labels ap-
plied to technology-enabled teams.

From a technology as context perspective, we see that leadership
requires unique considerations on the part of the leader in technolo-
gically-enabled contexts (Dulebohn & Hoch, 2017; Meyer, 2010). There
is a “consensus among scholars that virtual teams are more difficult to
lead than face-to-face teams” (Hoch & Kozlowski, 2014, p. 391). Team

leadership needs to compensate for the challenges created by virtual
collaboration. Difficulties in leading such teams relate to both leader-
ship functions and leadership forms.

A large body of research has examined leadership functions in teams
with technology taken as a context. Specifically, research has focused
on the challenges leaders face specific to team affective processes, such
as relationship-building, which fosters team states such as team cohe-
sion and team trust (Powell, Piccoli, & Ives, 2004). Face-to-face teams
have been shown to have higher levels of cohesion than virtual teams
(Straus & McGrath, 1994; Warkentin, Sayeed, & Hightower, 1997), and
teams using chat have lower levels of cohesion compared to face-to-face
teams and videoconferencing teams (Hambley, O'Neill, & Kline, 2007).
Computer-mediated teams are also generally less satisfied in their team
interactions than face-to-face teams (Baltes, Dickson, Sherman, Bauer,
& LaGanke, 2002). Trust is integral to virtual team functioning, but is
also difficult to form virtually (Jarvenpaa & Leidner, 1999; Paul &
McDaniel Jr, 2004).

Research has also tackled the issue of team behavioral processes in
technology as a context, including communication and coordination
(Powell et al., 2004). Communication in virtual teams can be challen-
ging (Hambley et al., 2007). Virtual teams communicate through
multiple different channels, often including both instant messaging
through an enterprise social media platform and video conferencing.
Sometimes virtual team members can actually see the faces of their
team members, and other times, virtual team members only have text to
go off of to interpret a team member's meaning behind their words.
Nonverbal communication is a primary challenge for communication in
virtual teams (Sproull & Kiesler, 1991). Likewise, utilizing technology
for coordination of virtual team members can pose a challenge. Virtual
team members may come from different time zones so the physical
coordination of work can become asynchronous from one another,
making coordination challenging (Montoya-Weiss, Massey, & Song,
2001). Virtual team members also may encounter cultural differences,
especially global virtual teams, which may mean team members have
different preferences and work styles (Maznevski & Chudoba, 2000;
Meyer, 2015).

Finally, research has investigated team cognitive processes in
technology as a context. Cognitive processes are especially difficult to
develop in teams whose members rarely if ever meet in person.
However, formation of transactive memory systems in virtual teams is
essential to effective team task performance. Research on knowledge
coordination in virtual teams has shown that virtual teams form mental
maps of member's knowledge, but that these mental maps, “transactive
memory systems”, take a considerable amount of time to form
(Kanawattanachai & Yoo, 2007).

Research has found that leaders play an integral role in virtual team
functioning, and virtual team leaders can help to tackle challenges
caused by the virtuality of their teams through a few different means
(Gibson & Gibbs, 2006; Gilson, Maynard, Jones Young, Vartiainen, &
Hakonen, 2015). Research has demonstrated that leaders in virtual
teams are critical in encouraging positive team interactions and redu-
cing negative team interactions, such as team conflict (Wakefield,

Table 1
Four Perspectives on technology and their implications for leading teams in the digital age.

Technology perspective How digital technology relates to teamwork Leadership needs created by technology

Technology as team context Technology has mostly fixed features that place constraints on the team
and constitute a meaningful aspect of the team's context.

Technology features determine important aspects of the
leadership situation.

Technology as sociomaterial team
practices

Technology practices come about when team needs meet material
features of technology; technology and teamwork are mutually dependent
ensembles.

Material features of technology and behavioral intentions
jointly create affordances for leading and collaborating in
teams.

Technology as creation medium Technology enables teams to form in new ways within and outside of
formal organizations.

Digital tools and platforms enable leadership processes enacted
during team formation.

Technology as teammate Technology is a member of the team, fulfilling a distinct role that directly
contributes to team performance.

Leadership needs to facilitate relationships among human and
synthetic team members.

L. Larson and L.A. DeChurch The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101377

4



Leidner, & Garrison, 2008). Virtual team leaders can help facilitate
team norms for how the team will go about communicating and co-
ordinating with one another (Malhotra, Majchrzak, & Rosen, 2007).
Clearly establishing norms for communication and coordination can
help to establish trust among team members by providing clear ex-
pectations for themselves and others. Fostering high quality commu-
nication can help increase trust in virtual teams (Marlow, Lacerenza, &
Salas, 2017). High quality communication has been shown to be pre-
dictive of who emerges as a leader in virtual teams (Gilson et al., 2015;
Gluckler & Schrott, 2007). Leaders that help to foster interpersonal
communication as opposed to more task-focused communication can
help increase cohesion and trust in virtual teams (Gupta &
Govindarajan, 2000). When virtual teams support more social com-
munication among team members, virtual teams report higher levels of
trust (Jarvenpaa & Leidner, 1999) and interpersonal relationships
(Robey, Khoo, & Powers, 2000). Interestingly, one study found that if
virtual team member actions are made more visible to the rest of the
team, then the effects of virtuality on trust may be lessened compared to
teams with less visible team member actions (Goh & Wasko, 2012).

Leaders can also help to overcome the challenges of virtual teaming
through cultivating psychological safety among team members.
Psychological safety is the shared belief that the team is an accepting
place for taking interpersonal risks. Making mistakes is an accepted part
of learning, and team members encourage each other to speak up
(Edmondson, 1999). High levels of psychological safety have been
shown to help mitigate the challenges of working and leading in virtual
teams such that communication and coordination is less challenging in
a psychologically safe environment (Gibson & Gibbs, 2006).

Finally, some styles of leadership are more conducive than others in
fostering productive teamwork in virtual teams. Transformational lea-
dership in virtual teams was associated with higher team performance,
team satisfaction, and team motivation (Andressen, Konradt, & Neck,
2012; Gilson et al., 2015; Purvanova & Bono, 2009; Whitford & Moss,
2009).

In sum, leaders may be able to help virtual teams overcome the
challenges of virtuality by encouraging visible, high quality, socially-
oriented communication in order to help build trust and cohesion
among virtual team members. Leaders can also help to encourage
psychological safety among team members to help with virtual team
communication and coordination. Finally, transformational leadership
behaviors may be more beneficial than transactional behaviors in
overcoming the challenges faced by virtual teams.

Taken together, these findings summarize ways that team leader-
ship meets team needs when team members are working remotely
largely through and with digital technologies. The key assumption
about leading teams from this technology perspective is that technology
features determine important aspects of the leadership situation. We
summarize the findings reviewed in this section as suggesting the

following leadership implication:

Leadership Implication #1. Team leaders need to compensate for the
challenges that virtual teams face in developing affective and cognitive states
and enacting team processes, challenges that are created by virtual
collaboration (remote communication through digital tools, diversity, etc.).

A second area for leadership research related to our review of re-
search examining technology as a context examines leadership forms.
Extant research on leadership in teams from the technology as context
perspective suggests that team leadership benefits from sharing lea-
dership among team members. Research on leadership forms in virtual
teams suggests that distributing leadership across multiple members of
the virtual team rather than a single member is a more effective and
efficient leadership structure in many virtual team settings (Bell &
Kozlowski, 2002). This is because placing all leadership responsibility
on a single virtual team member requires more time and effort than
your average face-to-face team due to the technological tools that must
be used in order to complete typical leadership activities, such as mo-
tivation and direction-setting (Purvanova & Bono, 2009). In fact, mul-
tiple studies have observed that the inherent structures and collabora-
tive tendencies within virtual teams cause leadership behaviors to
emerge informally from a number of team members rather than from
any officially appointed leader (Avolio, 1999; Carte, Chidambaram, &
Becker, 2006; Charlier, Stewart, Greco, & Reeves, 2016; Yukl, 1998).
The observation from these studies is that shared leadership is better
than hierarchical leadership for helping virtual teams develop needed
affective and cognitive states and enact team processes.

Leadership Implication #2. Shared leadership forms are better than
vertical forms for helping virtual teams develop functional affective and
cognitive states and enact team processes.

Technology as sociomaterial

A second body of work takes a different view of technology. Work
that adopts a technology as sociomaterial team practices perspective
considers the technology practices that teams develop as they en-
counter material aspects of digital technologies (Table 1). Technology
practices come about when team members' intentions, a desire to do
something, meet features of digital technologies, an ability to do
something using a feature of technology. The earliest work on teams to
reflect this technology perspective emerged from structuration which is
a concept that “acknowledges the active role of human agency in social
systems” (Poole & DeSanctis, 1992, p. 6). The idea of structuration
evolved into the area of research examining adaptive structuration
theory. Adaptive structuration theory is proposed as a “framework for
studying variations in organization change that occur as advanced

Table 2
Definitions of exemplar technology-enabled team types.

Entity Definition Exemplar citation(s)

Computer-supported work groups Two or more people who communicate and make decisions using specialized computer hardware and
software.

DeSanctis & Gallupe, 1987

Virtual teams Virtual teams are groups of people connected by a shared goal that use technology in order to interact with
each other.

Martins, Gilson, & Maynard,
2004

Online community A virtual space where people come together with others to converse, or to exchange information or other
resources.

Resnick & Kraut, 2011

Crowd People who self-organize online around a common purpose; typically that purpose was “once performed by
employees and is now outsourced to a network” of people through an “open call” for participation.

Howe, 2006

Peer production group Individuals who come together to “harness the collaborative efforts of many individuals in order to create
artifacts of lasting value”

Kittur et al., 2009

Flash team A team that is dynamically assembled with paid experts drawn from a crowd. Retelny et al., 2014
Human-robot team Team comprised of humans and embodied intelligent agents working interdependently in pursuit of a

common goal.
DeCostanza et al., 2018

Human-AI team Team comprised of humans and intelligent agents working interdependently in pursuit of a common goal. DeCostanza et al., 2018

L. Larson and L.A. DeChurch The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101377

5



technologies are used” (DeSanctis & Poole, 1994, p. 122). Adaptive
structuration explains that a technology's features can serve very dif-
ferent functions to a team. Team members develop practices and use
technologies in ways that meet their needs. The same team may use the
same technology differently at different times as their needs change.
Likewise, different teams might use the same technology in different
ways. In this way, the sociomaterial perspective examines technology
and teams as mutually dependent ensembles (Orlikowski, 2007) and
leads us to explore “the development or use of materials and forms” in
teams (Leonardi, 2012, p. 34).

The view of technology as mutually intertwined with social prac-
tices is often examined from a technology affordance perspective. The
core idea of affordances originated from James Gibson's Gestalt psy-
chology thinking that objects do not have inherent functions (Gibson,
1977); rather a function is what comes about when an individual rea-
lizes that an object can be used for something. It is neither the person
nor the object, separately, that explains the pleasure of resting on a tree
stump, rather it is the moment when the tired person sees the flatness of
the stump and decides to sit. In this example, fatigue creates the per-
son's motivation to rest and the stump's flatness is a material property
that can enable rest. Flatness has afforded the weary hiker a means to
rest. Though not always tactile, digital technologies nonetheless have
properties that inspire uses as well. Many of these have been described
and characterized as technology affordances.

Consider the association affordance (Treem & Leonardi, 2013). Many
team processes require that team members form a mental under-
standing of who holds what viewpoint, who creates which products or
ideas, or who supports or opposes whom. The team process of mon-
itoring and backup behavior (Marks, Mathieu, & Zaccaro, 2001) implies
that team members can observe one another's work and intervene when
the work is subpar in order to ensure that team performance does not
suffer. Many programmed features that are built into digital technolo-
gies afford team members the ability to make these associations. As an
example, consider any project management software (e.g., Slack,
Asana, Basecamp) that has members create a profile with their name
and photo. When the member posts something, the post appears next to
their name and photo. A team member who wants to go back and re-
view what has been posted related to a particular deliverable could use
the search function to see who has contributed what.

“An affordance perspective recognizes how the materiality of an
object favors, shapes, or invites, and at the same time constrains, a set
of specific uses” (Zammuto, Griffith, Majchrzak, Dougherty, & Faraj,
2007, p. 752). Zammuto and colleagues use the concept of affordances
to “capture the interplay between IT and organization” to represent the
idea that “new combinations of technology and organizational features
continually create possibilities that affect organizational form and
function” (p. 750). Zammuto et al. (2007) suggested five possible af-
fordances offered by organizational technologies: work processes vi-
sualization, real-time product and service innovation, virtual colla-
boration, collaboration with many people at once, and virtual reality.

As an example of how the sociomaterial view considers the joint
confluence of human intentions and material aspects of technology,
consider a technology called Ambit. Ambit (Ambit, 2019) is a software
tool that monitors team conversations in realtime and provides instant
feedback on the percentage of air time captured by each team member
during a discussion. This feature may serve as a shared leadership af-
fordance, enabling the group to adjust and rebalance conversation to
gain input from soft spoken members. Another group may see this in-
formation differently, instead using the tool to determine the deviant
whose pattern of communication is blocking the passage of an im-
portant initiative. Importantly, the technology has features, but the way
these features are perceived and appropriated by the team can vary
widely.

With the exception of Poole and DeSanctis' adaptive structuration
theory, work viewing technology from a sociomaterial lens proliferated
in the 2000's alongside the spread of online communities (i.e., Barrett,

Oborn, & Orlikowski, 2016; Faraj, Jarvenpaa, & Majchrzak, 2011) and
crowds (i.e., Orlikowski & Scott, 2015; Osterlund, Mugar, Jackson,
Hassman, & Crowston, 2014). Online communities and crowds are in-
terrelated terms. The former is used to describe a virtual space “where
people come together with others to converse, or to exchange in-
formation or other resources” (Resnick & Kraut, 2011, p. 1). Organi-
zational scholars exploring online communities study the shared iden-
tity that develops and connect members. Crowds, on the other hand, are
more deliberative and closer to resembling work teams. Crowds include
people who self-organize online around a common purpose; typically
that purpose was “once performed by employees and is now outsourced
to a network” of people through an “open call” for participation (Howe,
2006). Crowds often form within online communities. Online commu-
nities and crowds can form within traditional organizations or outside
formal organizations. An example of the latter is InnoCentive
(InnoCentive, 2019), an open innovation platform where organizations
post challenges offering rewards to solvers who need not be employees
of the sponsoring organization.

If we adopt a technology as sociomaterial view then we see the ways
in which team leadership comes about and is enacted as team needs
meet technological materiality. Leaders and team members have
agency in determining how technologies are used to meet team needs.
Research has explored the ways in which the “imbrication of humans
and material agencies” (Leonardi, 2011, p. 147) can explain leadership
functions and forms.

Research taking a sociomaterial view of technology has explored the
ways in which leadership functions come about in tandem with mate-
rial aspects of digital technologies (Oborn, Barrett, & Dawson, 2013).
Studies have identified practices that meet affective team needs. For
instance, in a study of three virtual investing-related communities,
members with no formal role took on the role of conflict mediators
“when a disagreement between two individuals became personal and
destructive” (Gu, Konana, Rajagopalan, & Chen, 2007; Faraj et al.,
2011, p. 1232). Members also stepped forward to motivate and direct
the group. Though rarely the initiator of the idea, idea champions “en-
sure that the kernel of the idea was maintained and evolved through the
discussion” (Kane, Majchrzak, Johnson, & Chen, 2009). A final example
of how informal leadership is used to build affective attachment is
metavoicing, which occurs when online community members react to
one another's presence in the online community, their profile, con-
tributed content, or other activities (Majchrzak, Faraj, Kane, & Azad,
2013).

Studies also suggest leaders help online communities and crowds to
meet their cognitive process-related group needs. For example, quali-
tative studies observed the role of the shaper in an online community.
The shaper is someone who helps to organize diverse contributions into
a coherent message (Majchrzak et al., 2007; Yates, Wagner, &
Majchrzak, 2010). The shaper self-nominates to take on the work of
intellectually integrating contributions. Another leadership act aimed at
team cognition is called channeling participation. Channeling participa-
tion occurs when members “create a narrative that helps keep fluid
participants informed of the state of the knowledge, with this narrative
having a necessary duality between a front narrative for general public
consumption and a back narrative to air the differences and emotions
created by the tensions” (Faraj et al., 2011, p. 1231).

Quite a few studies have explored leadership that behaviorally in-
tegrates team members' ideas and actions. One set of activities is la-
beled engendering roles in the moment. This occurs when observing “a
perceived state of the community, coupled with a perceived self-effi-
cacy that a particular contribution might be helpful to the community...
These roles are not enacted because the participant is a member of a
core group or asserts leadership authority…Instead, … the participant
appears to be enacting a self-defined role as a mediator, ‘unmasker,’
organizer, or supporter…” that sustains collaboration (Faraj et al.,
2011, p. 1231). Another leadership act enabling behavioral integration
in online communities is dynamically changing boundaries, a strategy

L. Larson and L.A. DeChurch The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101377

6



used by online community members to “discourage or encourage cer-
tain resources into and out of the communities at certain times” (Faraj
et al., 2011, p. 1231).

Lastly, leaders in online communities enable adaptive behavioral
responses among contributors. Members of online communities evolve
technology affordances in ways that are embedded by, and become
embedded into, iteratively enhanced social norms. “These iterations
help the OC to socially and technically automate responses to tensions
so that the community does not unravel” (Faraj et al., 2011, p. 1231).
Evolving technology affordances is a strategy for teams to remain
adaptive in response to changes.

Taken together, the work on leadership functions taking a socio-
material view of technology suggests ways that features of technology
can enable team members to lead the development of needed affective
and cognitive team states and behavioral team processes. The key as-
sumption about leading teams from this technology perspective is that
material features of technology and behavioral intentions jointly create
affordances for leading and collaborating in teams. The findings re-
viewed in this section can be summarized with the following leadership
implication:

Leadership Implication #3. Team leaders can shape technology practices
in order to foster the development of functional affective and cognitive states
and enactment of team processes.

Research adopting a technology as sociomaterial perspective also
speaks to the second dimension of team leadership: forms. DeSanctis
and Poole (1994) pointed out that technology plays an important role in
shaping team status hierarchies. Material aspects of technological tools
can determine “the likelihood of leadership emerging when the tech-
nology is used, whether a leader is more likely or less likely to emerge,
or whether there will be equal participation versus domination by some
members” (p. 127).

Research on online communities and crowds emphasizes the im-
portance of emergent, informal leadership that is often shared or ro-
tated among community members. Leadership in online communities
and crowds tends to shift among members, and leadership authority has
been observed as “fleeting in such communities” (Faraj et al., 2011, p.
1231). In fact, online communities have even been seen as resisting
formal leadership from those developing and maintaining the platforms
(Brabham, 2008). Overall, the inherent structure of online communities
and crowds lends to a more shared, informally emergent leadership
structure in terms of the form in which leadership takes in such teaming
types. These findings emphasize that technological affordances can af-
fect the form of leadership that emerges in teams, and also the degree to
which leadership is stable or fluid. This suggests the following leader-
ship implication:

Leadership Implication #4. Team technology practices can shape the
emergence of team leadership structures, and the stability versus fluidity of
team leadership structures.

Technology as creation medium

A third area of research takes another perspective of technology.
Work adopting a technology as team creation medium perspective ex-
plores the ways that technology platforms are shaping who forms teams
and how they do it (Table 1). This research explicitly focuses on the role
of technology in the initial formation and later reformation of teams
through boundary management practices. The technology as creation
medium perspective views technology as creating new opportunities for
team leadership, expanding the ways leaders can lead teams. Studies
conducted from a technology as creation medium perspective also mark
a shift in thinking about technologies and teams insofar as studies il-
lustrate ways that the technologies themselves can serve all or at least
parts of the leadership role.

The context and sociomaterial perspectives have in common that

they both explain how technology meets traditional team leadership
functions like supporting affective and cognitive states and team pro-
cess behavior. The context view highlights ways that technology makes
each of these team needs more pressing, requiring leaders to compen-
sate for technology-induced challenges. The sociomaterial view ex-
plores technology practices in teams and suggests the kinds of practices
that can provide needed leadership functions and the ways technology
features shape team leadership forms. In the technology as creation
medium perspective, the focus shifts to new leadership functions and
leadership behaviors that are made possible with emerging technolo-
gies, and in some cases, to ways in which these functions can be ac-
complished by the technology as a leadership substitute. This per-
spective has flourished in the 21st century as the internet has become
widely accessible to larger audiences around the world. The larger the
population of internet users, the larger the pool becomes that could
potentially contribute to projects created through technology that was
not possible prior to the availability of large, diverse populations of
potential contributors.

One group of studies on technology as a creation medium is work on
peer production groups, the quintessential example being the teams
who come together to curate pages in the online encyclopedia
Wikipedia. Peer production groups are “large-scale, collaborative and
primarily voluntary models of production in some of the most in-
novative and competitive sectors of information and technology”
(Algan, Benkler, Fuster Morell, & Hergueux, 2013, p. 2). Some examples
of peer production groups include open source software teams who
rapidly self-assemble online in response to bugs in computer code
(Crowston & Howison, 2006), citizen science teams who self-assemble
to help classify and label stars in the galaxy (Iacovides, Jennett,
Cornish-Trestrail, & Cox, 2013), and open innovation teams, where
“people from different organizations work together to develop new
products, services, or markets” (Du Chatenier, Verstegen, Biemans,
Mulder, & Omta, 2009, p. 350). Most of the pages on the online en-
cyclopedia Wikipedia.com are written and maintained by a fluid core
team of individuals who monitor and update the content. Peer pro-
duction groups, like those managing Wikipedia articles (Giles, 2005),
consist of individuals who come together to “harness the collaborative
efforts of many individuals in order to create artifacts of lasting value”
(Kittur, Pendleton, & Kraut, 2009). In peer production examples such as
the creation and maintenance of the online open encyclopedia Wiki-
pedia or the Linux operating system (Weber, 2004), individuals vo-
luntarily join a cause or project because of some intrinsic value of the
project toward that person (Raymond, 1999). Team collaboration pro-
cesses among the groups working on the peer production project are not
organized in any particular way and are often only acknowledged
through peer production-related forums or chat boards.

Another group of studies comes from work on flash teams. Flash
teams come together on portals like Upwork.com that allow individuals
to lead the formation and maintenance of a team of experts to accom-
plish specific goals. Upwork is a marketplace for professional workers
that allows individuals to rapidly hire experts and supports their col-
laboration to accomplish a defined task. Flash teams provide a tech-
nological “framework for dynamically assembling and managing paid
experts from the crowd” (Retelny et al., 2014, p. 75). For example, one
might decide to convene a “flash team” using the software platform
Upwork (Retelny, Bernstein, & Valentine, 2017). Flash teams provide
an effective way to accomplish a variety of tasks ranging from creative
design to engineering projects (Retelny et al., 2014). Individuals who
participate in these teams have specialized skills and see new oppor-
tunities for flexible work on their own terms without a formal con-
nection to traditional organizations. In these types of groups, in-
dividuals have the choice to opt in to or out of projects based on their
own best interests.

The third set of studies in this subdomain explores team formation
systems. These studies use digital platforms to create teams, albeit in
very different ways. There are a variety of specific technologies, for

L. Larson and L.A. DeChurch The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101377

7

http://Wikipedia.com
http://Upwork.com


example Huddler or MyDreamTeam, that allow teams to self-organize
online based on algorithms that recommend teammates to one another.
With peer-production teams it is the platform that lays out the work,
and then teams form organically based on mutual attraction to the work
itself. With flash teams, a leader uses a platform to design the work and
then chooses a set of paid experts to carry out the work. The leader of
the flash team is designing the team. In contrast to the way teams form
with peer-production or flash team platforms, with team formation
systems members self-organize, but it's not the attraction to the work
that brings them together. It is the attraction to each other.

As an example of this distinction, on Wikipedia a peer-production
team came together to curate the page on “Florentine Painting” because
of their shared expertise and interest in accurately conveying the most
notable painters, paintings, techniques, and influences on Florentine
painting. The team formed because its members were all drawn to the
same task. In contrast, those who join teams in team formation systems
do so on the basis of personal bases of attraction. They choose who to
work with, and the task follows. One example of a team formation
system is the online tool Huddler that “utilizes a dynamic programming
algorithm to optimize for highly familiar teammates” (Salehi, McCabe,
Valentine, & Bernstein, 2017, p. 1700). Another is a tool called My-
DreamTeam (Gomez-Zara et al., 2019) which is an online searchable
tool where those joining project teams can run queries to search for
teammates matching those of their ideal teammates. All of these studies
explore new leadership capabilities invited by technologies.

If we adopt a technology as a team creation medium perspective,
then we see the ways that technology is expanding the purview of team
leadership. Research from this perspective has taken as a starting point
the introduction of a new technology, and then investigated the ways
the technology creates leadership needs that take effect during the
process of team formation, and then as the team develops and needs to
reconfigure itself. As we review research on technology as a creation
medium, we see how this genre of work invites leadership researchers
to expand the functional lens to place greater emphasis on leadership
during team formation. Work in this area expands the focus of leader-
ship, illustrating ways that leadership dynamics are set in motion
during the team formation process aided by digital platforms. To il-
lustrate this point, consider the leadership processes involved in online
peer production teams.

The leadership that occurs within peer production teams is self-
governing. There is often a person or group of people who act as ad-
ministrators ensuring that the technical infrastructure is set up and
maintained (Butler, Sproull, Kiesler, & Kraut, 2002). Besides the one
layer of leadership defined by the platform's organizational structure,
the bulk of the leadership in peer production is emergent. Many of the
active contributors of peer production teams, who are the individuals
who do the bulk of the content creation in a platform like Wikipedia,
are also often identified as taking on a leadership role and are often not
compensated for their work (Zhu, Kraut, & Kittur, 2012, 2013). As peer
production is a voluntary activity, team leaders must find non-monetary
ways to motivate others to contribute. This means leaders must provide
intrinsic rewards for contributors such as creating a community that
contributors can embed themselves within and derive meaning from
(Deaux & Stark, 1996; Penner & Finkelstein, 1998). Recruiting members
to the team and erecting a meaningful boundary that serves as a basis
for positive social categorizations is especially important in these
groups that form outside of any formal organizational structure.

From a leadership perspective, these teams are formed by those with
project needs or vision, or workers can join a pre-existing cause, started
and maintained by individuals they may never meet in person. In these
situations, many of the leadership processes are occurring before team
members even join the team. Leadership involves recruiting team
members, monitoring progress, and determining when new members
need to be added or existing members disenfranchised.

Research taking a technology as creation medium perspective has
explored the ways in which traditional and emerging leadership

functions are carried out in online platforms. Starting with the tradi-
tional function of meeting team affective needs, a number of studies
have explored how technologies can play a role in meeting the lea-
dership needs of teams as they form. These studies do not study how
team leaders use technology (sociomaterial perspective) or are affected
by technology (context perspective), but rather, investigate a new
function of forming teams, and some studies reflect a technology per-
forming the leadership function even without the awareness of the
team. For example, Salehi et al. (2017) show that their tool Huddler
enables teams with greater familiarity to form faster than they can
without the tool and that familiarity doubles the performance of crowd
worker teams. Another example is work done by Luther and Bruckman
(2008) which observes that one of the functions of leaders in online
creative collaboration is to design a collaborative project for the team to
form around.

In a set of studies wherein digital technology oversees a team dating
process, team members work with the technology to form teams
(Curseu, Kenis, Raab, & Brandes, 2010). Team dating uses a technology
to allow people to meet a variety of potential teammates quickly for
short encounters, rating them, and then being matched with higher-
rated teammates. Another study demonstrates how technology can take
on leadership functions using a personality matching algorithm
(Lykourentzou, Antoniou, Naudet, & Dow, 2016). The technology used
an algorithm to form teams with balanced personality types. Crowd
worker teams whose members have different personality types experi-
enced less conflict and greater satisfaction than more homogenous
teams. Interestingly, when given a choice of being matched based on
their own ratings or the average ratings of people provided by everyone
participating, people prefer their own ratings (Lykourentzou, Kraut, &
Dow, 2017; Lykourentzou, Wang, Kraut, & Dow, 2016). Although not
explicitly labeled team dating, other researchers have investigated the
use of a community-wide deliberation process prior to team formation,
and researchers found that this process prior to team formation resulted
in higher team performance after team formation (Wen, Maki, Dow,
Herbsleb, & Rose, 2017).

Also on the topic of leading team affect, it is interesting to note that
a set of platforms is cropping up to allow individuals who work in paid
crowdsourcing environments and on peer-production and flash teams to
discuss their experiences and rate the “employers”. Four of them sup-
porting the Amazon Mechanical Turk workforce are: TurkerNation,
MTurk Forum, MTurkGrind, and MTurk Crowd. Workers come here to
decide which projects to participate in and which to avoid (LaPlante,
Silberman, & Metall, 2016). Although crowdsourcing research often
takes a technology as sociomaterial view, the work on these kinds of
groups pre-formation falls within our technology as creation medium
perspective, since this work examines the groups and technology before
and as they are being created rather than after they are created. For
individuals who regularly organize and lead flash teams, these forums
provide an important source of reputational capital that affects their
ability to lead projects by attracting top talent in the future.

Research taking a technology as creation medium view has also
explored the ways in which technologies play a role in supporting team
cognition as teams form. Specifically, research on crowd teams has
examined the role of technology in team cognition such as team fa-
miliarity, mental scaffolding, and collective intelligence. Overall, lea-
dership functions have also been preliminarily found to affect team
cognitive processes. For example, crowd teams high in interpersonal
familiarity have been shown to outperform crowd teams low in inter-
personal familiarity, which is believed to be because of team cognition
(Salehi et al., 2017). Also, differences in expertise levels can impede
crowd workers' collaborative effectiveness. Specifically, a crowd worker
team's use of modifiable shared artifacts to scaffold ideas between team
members and crowd workers was shown to improve collaboration (Lee
et al., 2018). Research has found that peer production group members
use other's history of project activity to form impressions of other's
expertise (Marlow, Dabbish, & Herbsleb, 2013). An expert leader in a

L. Larson and L.A. DeChurch The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101377

8



crowd worker team can also be helpful in leading non-experts to suc-
cessfully accomplish data analysis tasks (Feldman, Anastasiu, &
Bernstein, 2018). Finally, collective intelligence systems can help or-
ganizations to create optimal teams from crowds to fit specific organi-
zational needs (Malone, Laubacher, & Dellarocas, 2010). Together,
these results suggest preliminary evidence for the role of leader beha-
viors influencing team cognitive processes in teams using technology as
a creation medium. In crowd worker teams and peer production teams,
leaders must be particularly careful about clarifying team boundaries so
that team members can form productive cognitive models about one
another.

Research taking a technology as creation medium view has also
explored the ways in which technologies play a role in supporting team
behavioral processes as teams form. In order to illustrate what we mean
by this, consider a flash team. When a leader decides to create a flash
team, and recruit team members to join, the leader designs a workflow
in the platform. Creating workflows in flash teams is the act of dividing
up crowdsourcing jobs into smaller tasks. The workflow largely dictates
who communicates with whom in the course of coordinating the work.
Once the leader determines the workflow, the technology largely gov-
erns team behavioral processes; team interactions travel where the
tracks were laid down by the flash team leader and then are continually
reinforced by the technology. Research finds these workflows provide a
useful coordination artifact, but also prevent team members from being
able to adapt personal work plans when needed (Retelny et al., 2017).

Taken together, the work on leadership functions taking a creation
medium view of technology suggests unique ways that technologies are
shaping team formation within and outside formal organizations. These
technologies shape who comes together in teams in the first place or at
all, and also sets team dynamics in motion. The key assumption about
leading teams from this technology perspective is that team leaders can
leverage technologies during the team formation stage to foster the
development and maintenance of needed team states and process. As
such, we summarize the following leadership implication supported by
our review of this work.

Leadership Implication #5. Team leaders can use team formation
technologies in order to foster the development of functional affective and
cognitive states and enactment of team processes.

In reviewing these studies, we note a key shift in thinking about
leadership that needs to be mentioned. Most of these studies look at
how team members can use technologies during team formation. The
idea being that how individuals use technology during team formation
can be pivotal in supporting teamwork later on. Other studies look at
how the technology can be programmed in such a way as to take the
team members out of the leadership loop during team formation. These
studies move toward using the technology in team formation as an al-
ternative or substitute for leadership. As a case in point, Huddler (Salehi
et al., 2017) and related studies (i.e., Rahman, Roy,
Thirumuruganathan, Amer-Yahia, & Das, 2018) in the genre seek to
codify into an algorithm the choices and actions of team leadership
during the team formation process. Based on this, we summarize the
following additional leadership implication that arises from the tech-
nology as creation medium perspective:

Leadership Implication #6. Digital technologies used during team
formation can serve a team leadership role by fostering the development of
functional affective and cognitive states and enactment of team processes.

Not only does the creation medium perspective have implications
for leadership of the most commonly studied teamwork states and
processes, but research conducted with this view in mind suggest ad-
ditional leadership functions as well. Boundary work has long been an
important aspect of team leadership and presents as particularly critical
to leading wherein technology is a creation medium. A boundary de-
fines who is on a team and who is not (Hackman, 2012). Examples of
boundaries that may be drawn in organizations are vertical boundaries,

horizontal boundaries, demographic boundaries, and geographic
boundaries (Yip, Ernst, & Campbell, 2011). Vertical boundaries occur
across levels of hierarchy whereas horizontal boundaries occur across
function or expertise level. Demographic boundaries occur across group
diversities such as gender, age, or cultural background, and geographic
boundaries occur between those located in different locations. Bound-
aries provide teams with needed entitativity, a perception of group si-
milarity and interconnectedness (Campbell, 1958; Gaertner & Schopler,
1998). Hackman (2012) suggests that “real teams” require boundaries
that distinguish those on the team from those who are not. Meaningful
boundaries serve as a basis for positive social categorization processes,
define ingroups and outgroups, and inspire, motivate, and promote
collaboration within boundaries (Arrow & McGrath, 1995; Ernst & Yip,
2009; Lau & Murnighan, 2005).

Technological advances raise the importance of boundary manage-
ment work in technologically-enabled environments, but also the
challenges of dynamic boundary management work in such contexts
(Hwang, Singh, & Argote, 2015; Mortenson & Haas, 2018). Team
boundary spanning, or team boundary management, is “a team's efforts
to establish and manage external linkages” that can occur within and
between teams and organizations (Marrone, 2010). We adapt the classic
definition of team boundary management for a technologically-enabled
definition that better suits the boundary complexities that leaders face
within teams that use technology as a creation medium, like flash teams
or peer production groups. In these teams that form entirely through
online platforms, leader boundary management will be critical to
gaining participation, creating functional norms, and sustaining
member motivation to contribute to the team.

Research taking a technology as creation medium view has un-
covered a new leadership function needed by teams in informal online
environments. With flash teams, the team leaders need to continuously
reevaluate who stays on the team. The fluidity of flash teams requires
teams to balance conflict with cohesion, constantly defining and re-
defining the boundary of the collective project in order to socialize
newcomers and extradite members who no longer advance the shared
vision (Luther, Fiesler, & Bruckman, 2013).

Team boundaries, or a lack of clear team boundaries, is especially
salient in teams in which technology is being utilized as a creation
medium. To give some context, the bulk of work contributed in peer
production communities, such as a Wikipedia page, is typically com-
pleted by a small group of contributors who claim leadership in creating
that particular page (Kittur & Kraut, 2008, 2010). However, unlike in a
typical organization, there are no organizational or hierarchical struc-
tures in place to guide contributors in who leads whom. Technically, in
an open-source, peer production project, anyone can contribute to the
project. How does the core of contributors regulate the creation and
quality of output on the page? The core group of contributors must
navigate the fluid boundaries of the peer production project through
whatever means of communication and coordination are available to
them in the platform. These forms of organizing are also increasingly
being used inside formal organizations in open innovation projects
(Chesbrough & Appleyard, 2007). Although team-boundary spanning is
a well-known leadership behavior, what do leaders do when there is a
clear lack of boundaries to span? Setting up and managing team
boundaries through effective leader boundary management is critical to
the overall performance and viability of those working in the peer
production group. Fluid boundaries are a particular challenge for lea-
ders of teams using technology as a creation medium. Based on this
work emphasizing the increasing challenges related to boundary man-
agement, we suggest the following leadership implication:

Leadership Implication #7. Team leaders can use team formation
technologies to manage team boundaries both during team formation,
determining who's on the team, and also during subsequent team phases
through the periodic reevaluation of team membership.

L. Larson and L.A. DeChurch The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101377

9



Not only are digital technologies playing a role in team leadership
functions, they are also shaping the form leadership takes on in the
team. Distributed leadership is where multiple team members take part
in leading the team (Gronn, 2008; Thorpe, Gold, & Lawler, 2011), and
was examined in flash teams using a tool called Pipeline (Luther et al.,
2013). Pipeline was designed to “support and transform leadership,
with the goal of easing the burden on leaders of online creative pro-
jects” (Luther et al., 2013). The Pipeline tool “redistributes” leadership
to spread the burden of leadership across multiple team members,
which was theorized to improve team effectiveness. Another study on
leadership forms in Wikipedia finds strong evidence for the presence of
shared leadership among the online encyclopedia groups (Zhu, Kraut,
Wang, & Kittur, 2011). Studies like these show how a digital technology
can shape the leadership form that comes about. Other studies show
how individuals' behavior with these technologies can shape their own
fate as team leaders.

As a case in point, studies using the MyDreamTeam (Gomez-Zara
et al., 2019) tool found significant disparities in the number of team
invitations individuals sent out. This disparity was important because
the study also found that being central in the team invitation network,
i.e., being the one who invites everyone to the team, predicted leader
emergence once the team began to work together (Twyman, 2019).
Hence, those who are most active in using technologies to assemble
teams may also have an outsized role in leading them once formed.

Reflecting the technology as team creation medium lens, these
studies find consequential leadership dynamics are playing out in on-
line digital platforms as teams are forming and are shaping the lea-
dership functions and forms involved in teamwork later on. The studies
of tools like Pipeline highlight the ways digital tools are shaping lea-
dership structures in teams. Studies like Twyman (2019) show actions
taken during team formation can shape team leadership emergence
later on as the team executes taskwork. Accordingly, we note the fol-
lowing leadership implications that relate to team leadership forms:

Leadership Implication #8. Digital technologies can shape the leadership
structures that emerge in teams.

Leadership Implication #9. Team members actions and interactions
during team formation within digital technologies can play a role in who
emerges as a team leader.

Technology as a teammate

The fourth area of research takes yet another perspective of tech-
nology. Work adopting a technology as teammate perspective explores
the ways that digital technologies are advancing to the point of ful-
filling a distinct role on the team (Table 1). As the long history of work
on digital technologies and teams clearly suggests, technologies have
long been important to teams. The role of technology in the other three
perspectives has been to understand how technology affects teamwork.
In the context view, it constrains teamwork. In the sociomaterial view,
it gives rise to work practices. In the creation medium view, it creates
new opportunities to lead during the formation process. In the team-
mate view, technology is not viewed as it constrains or augments what
team members are doing, technology is viewed as a motivated social
being operating as a co-equal member of the team.

We are quickly approaching a time when digital technologies are as
agentic as are human counterparts. Historically, humans have worked
alongside machines in many forms, such as in automobile assembly
lines or cracking codes in World War 2. Today, many airplanes have an
autopiloting system consisting of code that works as a teammate
alongside human pilots. The future promises even more automation in
our day-to-day lives with innovations in autonomous transportation,
like self-driving Ubers and autonomous ground transportation.
Moreover, autonomous agents will become more embedded in organi-
zational life, as organizations begin to use AI in nearly every corner of

their organizations, from human resources (Bokelberg et al., 2017),
selection (Strohmeier & Piazza, 2015) and training (Taylor, 2017), to
steering and investment decisions (Strier, 2017).

The extant literature on leadership in teams has focused on lea-
dership of teams of humans. However, as we just listed in the previous
paragraph, technology is becoming increasingly prevalent within our
teams, taking on team roles and functions that used to be occupied by
humans (Bourton, Lavoie, & Vogel, 2018; Nass, Fogg, & Moon, 1996).
Important work in the human-computer interaction literature has
started to push the boundaries of this work to not only think about the
best possible design of technologies for human use, but also con-
sideration of how to create technologies that can best take on team roles
or functions so that they can also collaborate well with their human
teammates (Ajoudani et al., 2018; Breazeal, Kidd, Thomaz, Hoffman, &
Berlin, 2005; Groom & Nass, 2007). In contrast to our previous per-
spectives wherein technology was being used by humans or augmenting
human behavior, our review of the literature invites us to acknowledge
a new perspective on leadership and technology: technology as a
teammate.

Although clearly relevant to organizational scholars, work ex-
amining technology as a teammate has primarily lived in areas other
than organizational behavior. Kellogg, Valentine, and Christin (2019)
proclaim “organizational scholarship has not kept pace with the ways
that algorithmic technologies have the potential to transform organi-
zational control in profound ways, with significant implications for
workers” (p. 2). Thus, we find much of the work on technology as
teammate originating from the area of human-computer interaction and
other technology-related areas, rather than in the organization sciences.
Human-robot teams have been the subject of study in these areas for
much of the 20th century in the form of assembly line teams, for ex-
ample. Although the study of the interaction between humans and ro-
bots is not new, only within the past decade or so has the scholarly
research been able to actually study human interaction with intelligent
agents. This is due to the fact that the intelligent technologies have only
recently become “intelligent”, with the creation of artificially in-
telligent agents such as IBM's Watson. Thus, the human-AI team has
only come about in the 21st century.

At this point, it is useful to distinguish the terms agent, technology,
robot, and AI. DeCostanza et al. (2018) distinguish a technology from an
agent when it comes to teams: “we reserve the term technology for those
devices, software, protocols, and other interventions that target the
members of the team with the goal of improving team processes. It is
entirely possible that a technology will also be a team member, which
we refer to as an agent. We use the term technology when referring to
its role as assisting in team performance as opposed to satisfying its role
in the team” (DeCostanza et al., 2018, p. 4). A robot can be either a
technology or an agent, depending on its role in the team. If the robot
merely augments a human, making no unique contributions to the team
apart from making a human more effective, then it is a technology. If,
on the other hand, the robot is a team member fulfilling a distinct role
in the team and making a unique contribution to performance, then it is
an agent. For the purposes of our review, we use the term robot to refer
to the latter meaning, where robots are a type of agent, serving as a
member of the team. Thus, the perspective of technology as teammate
deals with technology that acts as an agent, not just a technology.

Next, it is necessary to distinguish the difference between robots and
AI to better define human-robot teams from human-AI teams. Robots are
embodied agents with physical features roughly resembling human
characteristics. Not all agents are embodied, and disembodied compu-
tational systems can also be a teammate, which introduces the notion of
Artificial Intelligence (AI) to teams. AI is defined as the use of a com-
puter to “perform tasks normally requiring human intelligence, such as
visual perception, speech recognition, decision-making, and translation
between languages” (Artificial intelligence, 2019). The most critical
aspect of this definition being “tasks normally requiring human in-
telligence,” since this distinguishes AI from automation which also

L. Larson and L.A. DeChurch The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101377

10



involves technology performing human tasks, but typically more be-
havioral tasks. We use the term agent in human-agent teams to refer to
cases where a technology serves as a team member broadly. This um-
brella term then captures two types of human-agent teams: human-
robot teams and human-AI teams. The primary distinction between the
two being the physical embodiment of the robot. Both are computer-
ized, employ computational algorithms, and occupy a role on the team.
However, the robot is physically embodied while the AI teammate is
not. The distinction is useful because prior work on robot embodiment
is important for leading human-robot teams, but not for leading human-
AI teams.

Human-robot teams are composed of humans and embodied in-
telligent agents working interdependently in pursuit of a common goal
(DeCostanza et al., 2018). Human-robot teams include teams of humans
and robots working on assembly lines together and teams of human
cooks and touch screens working as order-takers in a fast food restau-
rant. Human-AI teams are composed of humans and disembodied in-
telligent agents working interdependently in pursuit of a common goal
(DeCostanza et al., 2018; Wilson & Daugherty, 2018). Examples of AI
include machine learning or deep learning computational techniques
used in the corporate world to predict market changes or human be-
havior (Pyle & San Jose, 2015; Wellers, Elliott, & Noga, 2017). Machine
learning algorithms “detect patterns and learn how to make predictions
and recommendations by processing data and experiences, rather than
by receiving explicit programming instruction” (Chui, Kamalnath, &
McCarthy, 2018). One could imagine AI being used in teams to run risk-
analyses for team decisions or help with retaining and sharing relevant
team information (Wilson & Daugherty, 2018).

Extant research on humans working in teams with agents is still in
its infancy, but one major point stressed in the extant literature on the
topic is that human-agent teaming of the future will present a range of
challenges (Chakraborti, Kambhampati, Scheutz, & Zhang, 2017;
Talamadupula, Briggs, Chakraborti, Scheutz, & Kambhampati, 2014).
Humans have been working alongside some form of automation for
decades, and there have obviously been leaders of such teams. How-
ever, in the past, a leader's consideration of such technologies was to
ensure that there was a person on the team that was equipped to
manage or operate the technology and to step in if something mal-
functioned. However, we are now moving into a new era of robotics and
automation where agents are taking on more advanced executive
functions, like choosing the team, providing feedback on team pro-
cesses, or intervening to stimulate controversy over team decisions.

Though more nascent than the other three perspectives, this per-
spective represents one of the most exciting new frontiers for team
leadership research. Though there are far fewer studies, particularly
empirical ones to summarize in this domain, we synthesize existing
conceptual perspectives with the lens applied thus far in our review in
order to outline three leadership implications suggested by this early
thinking on technology as teammate.

A first set of thinking in this area relates to affective and cognitive
leadership needs. A major issue in human-agent teamwork is getting
humans and technology to have productive affective processes.
Researchers have begun to investigate issues like trust in human-robot
interaction (Billings, Schaefer, Chen, & Hancock, 2012; Freedy, de
Visser, Weltman, & Coeyman, 2007; Lee & See, 2004). In particular,
research has found that humans' trust in robots was highly dependent
on the robot's performance and perceived competence (Hancock et al.,
2011). Another study found that team members preferred to cede
control to a robot rather than a human teammate (Gombolay, Gutierrez,
Clarke, Sturla, & Shah, 2015). Teams have also been shown to perform
better when they were emotionally attached to a robot teammate (You
& Robert, 2018). Researchers have even looked into anxiety detecting
systems in human-robot collaboration (Rani, Sarkar, Smith, & Kirby,
2004). However, little empirical research has been done on a leader's
considerations in leading teams with modern-day robotics working
alongside human teammates.

This research suggests that leaders must not only manage the in-
teraction between humans and robots, but they must also consider the
way introducing robots to teams might change human-human re-
lationships (Jung, 2017; Jung & Hinds, 2018). Introducing robots to
social settings has been found to shape the interactions that occur
among humans. For example, in a study introducing a snack delivery
robot to the workplace, employees were later found to be more polite
because they were paying close attention to how one another was
treating the robot (Lee, Kiesler, Forlizzi, & Rybski, 2012). Another ex-
ample is research examining the ability of a robot teammate to mend
team conflicts. Researchers had the robot interject with statements like:
“Dude, what the heck! Let stay positive” (Table 2, p. 232). The study
found that robots using conflict repairing strategies were able to in-
fluence human-human conflict interactions (Jung, Martelaro, & Hinds,
2015).

Research also highlights the leadership need related to team cog-
nition. One obstacle acknowledged in expert reports is that a leader's
job is to help team members better understand the technology (McAfee,
Brynjolfsson, Goldbloom, & Howard, 2014, September). Experts claim
that human-robot teaming of the future will be primarily more of a
cognitively intensive challenge rather than a physical challenge because
of the implicit expectations that humans have of their teammates,
whether they are human or otherwise (Chakraborti et al., 2017;
Hoffman, 2013). Related to cognitive team processes, a leader's job is
two-fold. First, leaders are and will continue to be pivotal in the de-
velopment of productive teaming with intelligent agents. An extensive
knowledge of teamwork and human interaction is crucial for designing
technologies that work well with human team members. On the other
hand, leaders must be able to help human team members adopt new
technology teammates, including understanding the role of the tech-
nology and how the technology is preprogrammed to perform that role
on the team.

Taken together, early work on leadership functions taking a
technology as teammate view emphasizes the need for leadership to
develop functional affective and cognitive states. Interestingly, these
states have two foci: the interface between humans and machines, and
the interface among human teammates who are working in the pre-
sence of machines. The key assumption about leading teams from this
technology perspective is that the addition of intelligent machines as
full-fledged team members with their own programmed and evolving
motivations creates a leadership need of facilitating productive re-
lationships among human and synthetic team members. The findings
reviewed in this section can be summarized with the following lea-
dership implication:

Leadership Implication #10. Team leaders need to foster functional
affective and cognitive states and behavioral processes among human and
synthetic team members so that human-agent teams can perform effectively.

Adding intelligent machines as teammates creates additional lea-
dership needs. AI is quickly becoming a source of competitive ad-
vantage across industries and levels of organizations, and many in-
dustrious organizational leaders are driving this trend. However, there
are limits to the technology. The C-Suites of major technology firms -
Amazon, Google, Apple, and Netflix, to name a few - routinely leverage
AI, often in the form of machine learning, to help with pattern re-
cognition and analysis to make organizational steering decisions (Pyle
& San Jose, 2015). Rather than human-created rules that are pre-pro-
grammed into the algorithm, machine learning generates algorithms
from data. These approaches first train on massive data sets, creating
rules from patterns in the data set and are then refined through an
iterative process of applying the rules to data, learning, adjusting rules,
and so forth. Organizations are beginning to rely on such algorithms in
order to steer decision making processes, but there are limits. One
major theme of concerns for leaders in using AI is the ethics behind the
technology. Some ethical considerations come from the data that is
used to train the algorithms. The data used in training and making

L. Larson and L.A. DeChurch The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101377

11



predictions might come from a data set that is biased, misinforming the
team. Until ethical standards are developed at an industry level, leaders
must decide how to navigate the ethical questions of AI.

Leaders must navigate their human team members' acceptance of
the technology used as teammate. The leader must learn about and stay
up to date on the constant innovations occurring in the technology as
well as clearly communicate the technology and its capabilities to the
humans on the team in order to build team efficacy and trust around the
technology. Furthermore, the leader must communicate the necessary
pieces of information about the technology acting as teammate so that
humans understand the strengths and limitations of the technology.
Artificially intelligent machines tend to not advertise their limitations,
so is an important responsibility for team leaders. One example where
this mutual understanding of the technology's limitations is critical can
be seen in the Boeing 737-Max crashes in early 2019 (Beech &
Suhartono, 2019). Pilots in these incidents were unaware of the lim-
itations of a new update in the navigation systems, so the pilots did not
know to take control from the navigation system at the appropriate
time. Although an extreme example, the Boeing 737-Max incidents
underscore the importance of having everyone on the same page, both
humans and technologies. A leader's intricate knowledge of all team-
mates, human and otherwise, is critical in teams wherein technology is
perceived as a teammate.

Leadership Implication #11. Team leaders need to ensure that team
members have a shared understanding of the limits of technology and when
control needs to be taken back by human team members.

Not only does the prospect of synthetic teammates shape needed

team leadership functions, it also has important implications for lea-
dership forms. Several studies find humans appreciate ceding some
leadership responsibility over to robots. In a study by Gombolay and
colleagues mentioned earlier, human team members preferred to cede
control to the robot as compared to a human teammate. This has im-
plications for shared leadership more generally. If humans prefer
sharing leadership with technologies, this may make it more difficult
for humans to share leadership with one another. Also speaking to this
issue is work by Lee et al. (2012) on a study of the snackbot robot that
brought snacks to offices over a period of 4 months. This employee's
quote is telling about how bonds between humans and robots can later
spill into human relationships: “One time I told Snackbot–I think
Snackbot asked me if there was maybe a tour of [building] or some-
thing, which room should Snackbot take me up to, and I just told
Snackbot that probably someone would program it. It's a robot. It's
probably not going to make those choices. And then my office mate was
like, ‘Oh. Now you've gone and made Snackbot feel bad.’ So I think part
of it is about how my relationship with Snackbot is not just about
Snackbot but about other people who are around and kind of see us”
(Lee et al., 2012, p. 700). When human relationships are shaped in part
by how humans relate to technology, we would expect these interac-
tions to shape leadership emergence in teams. Those whose interactions
are more positive toward and effective in interacting with technological
teammates (robots or algorithms) are themselves likely to be seen as
more capable leaders. This leads to our final leadership implication:

Leadership Implication #12. Team members' interactions with synthetic
teammates can play a role in shaping who emerges as a leader, and the
overall leadership structure that emerges in human-agent teams.

Discussion

In reviewing the research on teams using digital technologies, we
distinguished four perspectives on technology that were not labeled as
such, but at closer inspection suggest the authors adopted somewhat
differing assumptions about the role of technology in teamwork. Then,
as we summarized the findings from each view using the two dimen-
sions of leadership, functions and forms, we identified a set of leader-
ship implications that arise from each perspective. Some of these im-
plications are close to those found in other reviews, particularly those in
the technology as context domain, but others offer exciting new di-
rections for team leadership research. In this closing section, we high-
light the novel implications suggested by our review and the future
directions they imply for the research and practice of leading teams.

New directions for leading teams in the digital age

In reviewing research on team leadership from a technology vantage
point, we identified twelve leadership implications suggested from this
work. As we look across the leadership implications arising from these
perspectives, summarized in Table 3, we would like to highlight three
opportunities ripe for future leadership theory and research. These in-
clude: (1) leading technology practices, (2) leading teams across an
expanded set of functions, and (3) collaboratively leading teams along
with technology.

The first new direction suggested by our review is increased atten-
tion to the various ways team leaders shape technology practices. A
leadership function discussed above and brought about by new tech-
nologies is that leaders must be aware that they help create team
context and shape how teams utilize various types of technology, a
process called team technology appropriation. This particular leadership
function applies in particular to leaders in online communities/crowds,
peer production groups, and flash teams. For example, Wikipedia, the
peer-produced online encyclopedia, was founded by Jimmy Wales, who
was the first leader within the Wikipedia platform. As such, Jimmy
Wales created context and helped to shape team technology

Table 3
Summary of leadership implications stemming from four technology perspec-
tives.

Technology as team context
Leadership Implication #1. Team leaders need to compensate for the challenges that

virtual teams face in developing functional affective and cognitive states and enacting
team processes, challenges that are created by virtual collaboration (remote
communication through digital tools, diversity, etc.).

Leadership Implication #2. Shared leadership forms are better than vertical forms for
helping virtual teams develop functional affective and cognitive states and enact team
processes.

Technology as sociomaterial team practices
Leadership Implication #3. Team leaders can shape technology practices in order to

foster the development of functional affective and cognitive states and enactment of
team processes.

Leadership Implication #4. Team technology practices can shape the emergence of
team leadership structures, and the stability versus fluidity of team leadership
structures.

Technology as team creation medium
Leadership Implication #5. Team leaders can use team formation technologies in

order to foster the development of functional affective and cognitive states and
enactment of team processes.

Leadership Implication #6. Digital technologies used during team formation can
serve a team leadership role by fostering the development of functional affective and
cognitive states and enactment of team processes.

Leadership Implication #7. Team leaders can use team formation technologies to
manage team boundaries both during team formation, determining who's on the team,
and also during subsequent team phases through the periodic reevaluation of team
membership.

Leadership Implication #8. Digital technologies can shape the leadership structures
that emerge in teams.

Leadership Implication #9. Team members' actions and interactions during team
formation within digital technologies can play a role in who emerges as a team leader.

Technology as a teammate
Leadership Implication #10. Team leaders need to foster functional affective and

cognitive states and behavioral processes among human and synthetic team members
so that human-agent teams can perform effectively.

Leadership Implication #11. Team leaders need to ensure that team members have a
shared understanding of the limits of technology and when control needs to be taken
back by human team members.

Leadership Implication #12. Team members' interactions with synthetic teammates
can play a role in shaping who emerges as a leader, and the overall leadership structure
that emerges in human-agent teams.

L. Larson and L.A. DeChurch The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101377

12



appropriation at the beginning of Wikipedia's life. Once Wikipedia
shifted to a more democratically-run system, Wikipedia page editors in
good standing could run for positions in Wikipedia administration
(Wikipedia contributors, 2019, October 7). Today, Wikipedia is led by
decisions made by those elected administrators. On a more micro-level,
there are page editors who take responsibility for certain pages or topic
areas. Both administrators and page editors alike now decide how to
move forward with the context and technology appropriation, such as
with the formation and use of comment sections within Wikipedia
through which editors may communicate.

The second new direction suggested by our review is an expanded
set of leadership functions. Specifically, our review suggests that lea-
dership actually begins before a team even forms. Our review took us
into the team formation literature and brought up a few implications of
leadership responsibilities in team formation. Another new function
from the technology as teammate perspective is the need for team
leaders to ensure that team members hold a shared understanding of
when authority that has been shared with synthetic teammates needs to
shift to human teammates. Issues of control get to the heart of how
humans and autonomous agents interact. Control is the basic me-
chanism by which human team members monitor AI at key points in
time, with the ability to intervene if deemed necessary. In thinking
about how leaders manage AI-control, the concept of a team interaction
mental model is useful (Lim & Klein, 2006). A team interaction mental
model is a mental representation among team members about how
members interact in performing taskwork. Leading teams with syn-
thetic teammates will require the development of effective human-
agent interaction models. These mental representations will need to be
shared by human teammates and programmed into the AI by tech-
nology developers that ensure control mechanisms that are clear to all
team members, human and synthetic.

The third new direction suggested by our review is collaboratively
leading teams along with technology. This direction came out of the
technology as team creation medium perspective when we found stu-
dies designing algorithms that would essentially take over the team
leader's role in staffing. We also saw this suggested in the technology as
teammate domain when robots were given control of task allocation
processes (Gombolay et al., 2015) or programmed to diffuse inter-
personal tension (Jung et al., 2015). Discussions of how AI will affect
managers often focus on two things: 1) AI can reduce the amount of
time leaders spend doing administrative work, and 2) AI will take on
more and higher level decision making (Kolbjørnsrud, Amico, &
Thomas, 2016; Parry, Cohen, & Bhattacharya, 2016). As advances in AI
render intelligent agents better able to take on much of the direct ad-
ministration, scheduling, and coordinating work in teams, human lea-
ders can be more effective to the extent that they develop ways to share
this work with their synthetic teammates. Similarly, as deep learning
algorithms prove their value in making important decisions, leaders can
work alongside these algorithms, adding their distinctive expertise on
social and interpersonal issues that need to be considered in tandem
with algorithmic judgement. The notion of ceding some responsibility
for leadership of team formation to intelligent machines opens up a new
research direction. What are the different forms of sharing leadership
with intelligent machines? Which aspects of leadership are team
members more and less willing to share with synthetic teammates? And
in terms of performance, which structures best promote effective
teamwork in human-agent teams?

These three themes apparent from examining team leadership from
a technology perspective suggest new and interesting directions for
leading teams. New sets of leadership activities come about when we
focus on sociomaterial practices or technology as a creation medium.
New sets of functions come about when we probe the technology as
creation medium or technology as teammate perspectives. Lastly, from
the technology as creation medium and technology as teammate vistas,
we are invited to consider the ways leadership can be effectively shared
between human and synthetic teammates. Whereas the preceding

discussion highlights new directions for leading teams revealed by our
review, it is also important to point out the enduring aspects of team
leadership.

Enduring aspects of leading teams

Across the four perspectives, functional aspects of team leadership
are as important as ever for supporting teamwork across the many
technology-enabled teams explored in our review. Leadership activities
that promote the emergence of affective states in teams came up as
important across areas. Trust was a common need across studies
viewing technology as a context (Gilson et al., 2015; Joshi et al., 2009;
Tyran et al., 2003), as a creation medium (Luther et al., 2013), and as a
teammate (Hancock et al., 2011). Cognitive team needs also cut across
technology viewpoints. Studies viewing technology as context point out
the need for leaders to address the lack of shared meaning across dis-
tributed team members (Bjørn & Ngwenyama, 2009), studies viewing
technology as sociomaterial call out team roles like the “shaper” who
organizes diverse contributions into a coherent product (Majchrzak
et al., 2007; Wagner & Majchrzak, 2006; Yates et al., 2010), and studies
in the technology as teammate genre emphasize that leaders need to
enable human and synthetic team members to understand and predict
others' thoughts (i.e., Chakraborti et al., 2017; Talamadupula et al.,
2014).

While the functional needs were present across studies conducted
with different technologies in mind, another observation looking across
these studies is the importance of contextualizing leadership functions
to the technology. For example, team behavioral processes are needed
by all teams, and yet the four technology views highlight interesting
differences in the kinds of behaviors required to align team member
contributions. For example, many studies of virtual teams focus gen-
erally on the need for communication (Gilson et al., 2015; Gluckler &
Schrott, 2007) whereas studies of teams on large online platforms take a
far more nuanced view of the behaviors that align members' contribu-
tions like engendering roles or evolving technology practices (Faraj
et al., 2011). Even more detailed and contextualized in the technology
are behaviors described in studies of human-agent teams. Consider this
description of backchanneling behavior: “a set of mostly nonverbal
behaviors by a listener in a conversation, which signals to the speaker
that the listener is actively engaged in the interaction. It includes be-
haviors such as ‘mm-hmm’ vocalizations, slight nodding, eye contact,
and orientation toward the speaker” (Jung et al., 2013, p. 1556). These
kinds of technology-contextualized processes will continue to be es-
sential in developing leadership theory and practice in the digital age.

Our review also highlights that leadership forms continue to be an
important aspect of leadership, and one that is likely to be shaped by
digital technologies. Whereas leadership functions are a more tangible
and observable aspect of teams, leadership forms are less visible to team
members. Conceptual and meta-analytic works point to the importance
of leadership structures in enabling team performance (c.f., Pearce &
Conger, 2003; D'Innocenzo et al., 2016). A theme evident in the tech-
nology as creation medium and technology as sociomaterial perspective
is that technology can be pivotal in shaping team leadership structures
(see Leadership Implications 4 and 8).

We can see from the preceding discussion that leadership functions
and forms continue to be meaningful aspects of leading teams across
technology perspectives. However, by examining the ways these two
dimensions of team leadership are theorized across perspectives, we can
better understand how these functions are met differently in different
technology environments. Having taken stock of three ways that tech-
nology opens up new possibilities for leadership theory and research,
and the continued utility of the dimensions of functions and forms of
leadership, we conclude by considering some of the implications of
technological advances for leadership development.

L. Larson and L.A. DeChurch The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101377

13



Leadership development in the digital age

The four perspectives of technology in teams highlighted in this
review point to new directions in leadership development. As organi-
zations continue to structure work around teams, relying more on in-
formal relationships and less on formal hierarchy, leadership develop-
ment has evolved to emphasize the importance of relationship building.
Accordingly, the targets of leadership development efforts focus on the
need to build social capital, rely on relational competence, and leverage
social awareness and social skills (Day, 2000). Leading teams in the
digital age suggests two directions for leadership development: (1)
extending the relational focus to include technologies and (2) exploring
ways that emerging AI tools can augment leader relational compe-
tencies.

In the technology as context view, leadership development frame-
works (Day & Dragoni, 2015; Zaccaro, Ardison, & Orvis, 2003) em-
phasize the role of context in more technologically-enabled teams and
the need for leaders to build important intra- and inter-team relation-
ships given this context (Cullen-Lester, Maupin, & Carter, 2017). Work
in this domain guides research and theory in leadership development
(Day, Fleenor, Atwater, Sturm, & McKee, 2014). The other three views
of technology and teams invite us to consider additional directions for
leadership development.

In the technology as sociomaterial view, we might consider func-
tional and structural leadership affordances. For example, affordances
like association explain how material aspects of technology and human
intentions jointly enable knowledge sharing in organizations (Treem &
Leonardi, 2013). The association affordance describes the ways tech-
nologies can signal “established connections between individuals, be-
tween individuals and content, or between an actor and a presentation”
(Treem & Leonardi, 2013, p. 162). Similarly, leadership affordances can
explain the ways in which materiality and motives constitutively shape
leadership emergence and effectiveness in teams. As an illustration, we
may consider a shared leadership affordance as the use of technological
features to signal the distribution of leadership across team members,
needed team roles, and over time. For example, when teams have access
to a communication mapping tool (Pentland, 2012), this may enable
team leadership focused on equal participation in the team. Leadership
development efforts are increasingly expanding the toolkit to leverage
network-enhancing practices that focus on one of three aims: help in-
dividuals build social competence, help individuals shape networks, or
help collectives co-create networks (Cullen-Lester et al., 2017; Leonardi
& Contractor, 2018). The technology affordance perspective may offer a
way forward to enable a greater emphasis on network-based interven-
tions that target the structure of groups. Previous research calls for
leadership development efforts that target teams (Day, Gronn, & Salas,
2004) and use insights from shared leadership research (e.g., Friedrich,
Vessey, Schuelke, Ruark, & Mumford, 2009; Pearce & Conger, 2003)
with prescriptive advice for designing team interactions. The notion of
leadership affordances is ripe for future theory and research and re-
presents a novel approach to leadership development.

In the technology as team creation medium perspective, we might
consider the role of relationship-building activities carried out prior to
and during team formation as an additional area for leadership devel-
opment. Research in this area suggests activities related to forming
teams (Harris, Gomez-Zara, DeChurch, & Contractor, 2019) and mon-
itoring team production using technologies (Faraj & Sambamurthy,
2006) are additional aspects of leadership.

In the technology as teammate view, leadership development needs
to expand focus to understand the leadership imperatives of building
effective relationships among human and synthetic teammates, among
human teammates as they interact with synthetic teammates, and
among multiple synthetic teammates.

The second implication for leadership development concerns ex-
ploring how AI tools, such as cognitive assistants, can augment leader
relational competencies. A cognitive assistant “helps its user with

various tasks” (Ebling, 2016, p. 4). Prevalent examples of cognitive
assistants include Amazon's Alexa and Google Home (Kepuska &
Bohouta, 2018) or IBM's Watson for Oncology which will “review all of
the data and recommend treatment options based on the latest evidence
and guidelines” (AOCNP, 2015, p. 31). Cognitive assistants have the
potential to augment current leadership development practices, such as
360-degree feedback, coaching, mentoring, or action learning (Day,
2000). Cognitive assistants can work one-on-one with organizational
members to target individualized learning, development, and self-reg-
ulation. Alternatively, cognitive assistants can work as teammates to
help the team learn and develop together. The cognitive assistant may
“see things” that team leaders might miss, like the structure of leader-
ship, manifesting in subtle speech patterns otherwise undetectable to
humans. Intelligent cognitive assistants represent a fascinating future
direction for leadership development.

Conclusion

Instead of handing out a book at the next leadership development
seminar, might attendees receive a shiny new device called Google
Teamwork instead? Could such a speaker, that observes work patterns
and makes personalized recommendations, ultimately replace executive
coaches? Perhaps insights gleaned from listening in the workday
background will be used to auto-generate a highly customized podcast
delivered during an executive's daily gym workout. Rapid advances in
technology and organizing invite a new genre of leadership scholarship.
Age old questions of who emerges as influential, how leadership tran-
sitions and/or comes to be shared, and the leadership processes best
promoting effectiveness take on new meaning when we envision
crowds and intelligent robots, or “cobots” (Gillespie, Colgate, &
Peshkin, 2001), working alongside humans in teams. As computer sci-
entists push the technological frontier, leadership scholars must con-
sider the implications of these advances for organizing. In our review,
we have channeled some of the exciting developments of the digital age
that relate to the field of leadership.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Steve Zaccaro, David Day, and two anonymous
reviewers for providing insightful developmental feedback on earlier
versions of this paper. This paper is based upon work supported by the
National Institutes of Health (1R01GM112938-01). The content is so-
lely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent
the official views of the National Institutes of Health. This paper is also
based on work supported by the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (80NSSC18K0276). Any opinions, findings, and con-
clusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the view of the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). Lastly, this paper is
based on work supported by the Army Research Laboratory
(W911NF1920140). The views, opinions, and/or findings contained in
this report are those of the authors and should not be construed as an
official Department of the Army position, policy, or decision, unless so
designated by other documents.

References

Ajoudani, A., Zanchettin, A. M., Ivaldi, S., Albu-Schäffer, A., Kosuge, K., & Khatib, O.
(2018). Progress and prospects of the human–robot collaboration. Autonomous
Robots, 42(5), 957–975.

Algan, Y., Benkler, Y., Fuster Morell, M., & Hergueux, J. (2013). Cooperation in a peer
production economy experimental evidence from Wikipedia. Available at SSRN
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2843518.

Ambit (2019). Retrieved from https://www.ambit.ai/.
Andressen, P., Konradt, U., & Neck, C. P. (2012). The relation between self-leadership and

transformational leadership: Competing models and the moderating role of virtuality.
Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies, 19(1), 68–82.

AOCNP, D (2015). Watson will see you now: A supercomputer to help clinicians make

L. Larson and L.A. DeChurch The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101377

14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0005
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2843518
https://www.ambit.ai/
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0025


informed treatment decisions. Clinical Journal of Oncology Nursing, 19(1), 31–32.
Arrow, H., & McGrath, J. E. (1995). Membership dynamics in groups at work: A theo-

retical framework. Research in Organizational Behavior, 17, 373–411.
Artificial intelligence (2019). In Oxford online reference. Retrieved from https://www.

oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/oi/authority.20110803095426960.
Avolio, B. J. (1999). Full leadership development: Building the vital forces in organizations.

Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Avolio, B. J., Kahai, S., & Dodge, G. E. (2000). E-leadership: Implications for theory,

research, and practice. The Leadership Quarterly, 11(4), 615–668.
Avolio, B. J., Sosik, J. J., Kahai, S. S., & Baker, B. (2014). E-leadership: Re-examining

transformations in leadership source and transmission. The Leadership Quarterly,
25(1), 105–131.

Baltes, B. B., Dickson, M. W., Sherman, M. P., Bauer, C. C., & LaGanke, J. S. (2002).
Computer-mediated communication and group decision making: A meta-analysis.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 87(1), 156–179.

Barley, S. R., Bechky, B. A., & Milliken, F. J. (2017). The changing nature of work:
Careers, identities, and work lives in the 21st century. Academy of Management
Discoveries, 3(2), 111–115.

Barrett, M., Oborn, E., & Orlikowski, W. (2016). Creating value in online communities:
The sociomaterial configuring of strategy, platform, and stakeholder engagement.
Information Systems Research, 27(4), 704–723.

Beech, H., & Suhartono, M. (2019, April 2). Between two Boeing crashes, days of silence
and mistrust. New York Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/
02/world/asia/boeing-max-8-lion-air.html.

Bell, B. S., & Kozlowski, S. W. (2002). A typology of virtual teams: Implications for ef-
fective leadership. Group & Organization Management, 27(1), 14–49.

Billings, D. R., Schaefer, K. E., Chen, J. Y., & Hancock, P. A. (2012, March). Human-robot
interaction: Developing trust in robots. Proceedings of the 7th annual ACM/IEEE in-
ternational conference on human-robot interaction (pp. 109–110). ACM.

Bjørn, P., & Ngwenyama, O. (2009). Virtual team collaboration: Building shared meaning,
resolving breakdowns and creating translucence. Information Systems Journal, 19(3),
227–253.

Bokelberg, E., Doral, C., Feinzig, S., Guenole, N., Lesser, E., Mertens, J., & Steele, S.
(2017). Extending expertise: How cognitive computing is transforming HR and the
employee experience. Retrieved from https://www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/
QVPR1K7D.

Bourton, S., Lavoie, J., & Vogel, T. (2018). Will artificial intelligence make you a better
leader? The McKinsey Quarterly, 2018(2), 72–75.

Brabham, D. C. (2008). Crowdsourcing as a model for problem solving: An introduction
and cases. Convergence, 14(1), 75–90.

Breazeal, C., Kidd, C. D., Thomaz, A. L., Hoffman, G., & Berlin, M. (2005). Effects of
nonverbal communication on efficiency and robustness in human-robot teamwork.
Proceedings of 2005 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems
(pp. 708–713). .

Burke, C. S., Diaz-Granados, D., & Salas, E. (2011). Team leadership: A review and look
ahead. In A. Bryman (Ed.). The sage handbook of leadership (pp. 338–351). Los
Angeles, CA: Sage.

Burke, J. L., Murphy, R. R., Rogers, E., Lumelsky, V. J., & Scholtz, J. (2004). Final report
for the DARPA/NSF interdisciplinary study on human-robot interaction. IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews), 34(2),
103–112.

Butler, B., Sproull, L., Kiesler, S., & Kraut, R. (2002). Community effort in online groups:
Who does the work and why. In S. Weisband (Ed.). Leadership at a distance: Research in
technologically supported work (pp. 171–194). New York, NY: Taylor & Francis Group.

Campbell, D. T. (1958). Common fate, similarity, and other indices of the status of ag-
gregates of persons as social entities. Behavioral Science, 3(1), 14–25.

Carte, T. A., Chidambaram, L., & Becker, A. (2006). Emergent leadership in self-managed
virtual teams. Group Decision and Negotiation, 15(4), 323–343.

Cascio, W. F., & Shurygailo, S. (2003). E-leadership and virtual teams. Organizational
Dynamics, 31(4), 362–376.

Chakraborti, T., Kambhampati, S., Scheutz, M., & Zhang, Y. (2017). AI challenges in
human-robot cognitive teaming. [PDF file]. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/pdf/
1707.04775.pdf.

Charlier, S. D., Stewart, G. L., Greco, L. M., & Reeves, C. J. (2016). Emergent leadership in
virtual teams: A multilevel investigation of individual communication and team
dispersion antecedents. The Leadership Quarterly, 27(5), 745–764.

Chesbrough, H. W., & Appleyard, M. M. (2007). Open innovation and strategy. California
Management Review, 50(1), 57–76.

Chui, M., Kamalnath, V., & McCarthy, B. (2018). An executive’s guide to AI. McKinsey
analytics. Retrieved from https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Business
%20Functions/McKinsey%20Analytics/Our%20Insights/An%20executives%20guide
%20to%20AI/Executives-guide-to-AI.

Chui, M., Manyika, J., & Miremadi, M. (2016, July). Where machines could replace hu-
mans—and where they can't (yet). Retrieved from https://www.mckinsey.com/
business-functions/digital-mckinsey/our-insights/where-machines-could-replace-
humans-and-where-they-cant-yet.

Chui, M., Manyika, J., Miremadi, M., Henke, N., Chung, R., Nel, P., & Malhotra, S. (2018,
April). Notes from the AI frontier: Applications and value of deep learning. Retrieved
from https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/artificial-intelligence/notes-
from-the-ai-frontier-applications-and-value-of-deep-learning.

Constant, D., Sproull, L., & Kiesler, S. (1996). The kindness of strangers: The usefulness of
electronic weak ties for technical advice. Organization Science, 7(2), 119–135.

Contractor, N. S., DeChurch, L. A., Carson, J., Carter, D. R., & Keegan, B. (2012). The
topology of collective leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 23(6), 994–1011.

Crowston, K., & Howison, J. (2006). Hierarchy and centralization in free and open source
software team communications. Knowledge, Technology, and Policy, 18(4), 65–85.

Cullen-Lester, K. L., Maupin, C. K., & Carter, D. R. (2017). Incorporating social networks
into leadership development: A conceptual model and evaluation of research and
practice. The Leadership Quarterly, 28(1), 130–152.

Curseu, P. L., Kenis, P., Raab, J., & Brandes, U. (2010). Composing effective teams
through team dating. Organization Studies, 31(7), 873–894.

Day, D. V. (2000). Leadership development: A review in context. The Leadership Quarterly,
11(4), 581–613.

Day, D. V., & Dragoni, L. (2015). Leadership development: An outcome-oriented review
based on time and levels of analyses. Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and
Organizational Behavior, 2(1), 133–156.

Day, D. V., Fleenor, J. W., Atwater, L. E., Sturm, R. E., & McKee, R. A. (2014). Advances in
leader and leadership development: A review of 25 years of research and theory. The
Leadership Quarterly, 25(1), 63–82.

Day, D. V., Gronn, P., & Salas, E. (2004). Leadership capacity in teams. The Leadership
Quarterly, 15(6), 857–880.

Deaux, K., & Stark, B. E. (1996, May). Identity and motive: An integrated theory of vo-
lunteerism. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Society for the Psychological Study
of Social Issues, Ann Arbor, MI.

DeCostanza, A. H., Marathe, A. R., Bohannon, A., Evans, A. W., Palazzolo, E. T., Metcalfe,
J. S., & McDowell, K. (2018). Enhancing human agent teaming with individualized,
adaptive technologies: A discussion of critical scientific questions (no. ARL-TR-8359). US
Army Research Laboratory Aberdeen Proving Ground United States.

DeSanctis, G., & Gallupe, R. B. (1987). A foundation for the study of group decision
support systems. Management Science, 33(5), 589–609.

DeSanctis, G., & Poole, M. S. (1994). Capturing the complexity in advanced technology
use: Adaptive structuration theory. Organization Science, 5(2), 121–147.

Dewhurst, M., & Willmott, P. (2014). Manager and machine: The new leadership equa-
tion. The McKinsey Quarterly, 4(3), 76–86.

D’Innocenzo, L., Mathieu, J. E., & Kukenberger, M. R. (2016). A meta-analysis of different
forms of shared leadership–team performance relations. Journal of Management,
42(7), 1964–1991.

Dissanayake, I., Zhang, J., Yasar, M., & Nerur, S. P. (2018). Strategic effort allocation in
online innovation tournaments. Information & Management, 55(3), 396–406.

Dow, S., Kulkarni, A., Bunge, B., Nguyen, T., Klemmer, S., & Hartmann, B. (2011, May).
Shepherding the crowd: Managing and providing feedback to crowd workers. CHI’11
extended abstracts on human factors in computing systems (pp. 1669–1674). .

Du Chatenier, E., Verstegen, J. A., Biemans, H. J., Mulder, M., & Omta, O. (2009). The
challenges of collaborative knowledge creation in open innovation teams. Human
Resource Development Review, 8(3), 350–381.

Dulebohn, J. H., & Hoch, J. E. (2017). Virtual teams in organizations. Human Resource
Management Review, 27, 569–574.

Ebling, M. R. (2016). Can cognitive assistants disappear? IEEE Pervasive Computing,
15(3), 4–6.

Edmondson, A. (1999). Psychological safety and learning behavior in work teams.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 44(2), 350–383.

Ernst, C., & Yip, J. (2009). Boundary spanning leadership: Tactics for bridging social
boundaries in organization. In T. Pittinsky (Ed.). Crossing the divide: Intergroup lea-
dership in a world of difference. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.

Fan, X., & Yen, J. (2004). Modeling and simulating human teamwork behaviors using
intelligent agents. Physics of Life Reviews, 1(3), 173–201.

Faraj, S., Jarvenpaa, S. L., & Majchrzak, A. (2011). Knowledge collaboration in online
communities. Organization Science, 22(5), 1224–1239.

Faraj, S., & Sambamurthy, V. (2006). Leadership of information systems development
projects. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 53(2), 238–249.

Feldman, M., Anastasiu, C., & Bernstein, A. (2018, June). Towards collaborative data
analysis with diverse crowds–a design science approach. International conference on
design science research in information systems and technology (pp. 218–235). Cham:
Springer.

Freedy, A., de Visser, E., Weltman, G., & Coeyman, N. (2007). Measurement of trust in
human-robot collaboration. Proceedings of the 2007 international conference on colla-
borative technologies and systems (pp. 106–114). Orlando, FL: IEEE.

Friedrich, T. L., Vessey, W. B., Schuelke, M. J., Ruark, G. A., & Mumford, M. D. (2009). A
framework for understanding collective leadership: The selective utilization of leader
and team expertise within networks. The Leadership Quarterly, 20(6), 933–958.

Gaertner, L., & Schopler, J. (1998). Perceived ingroup entitativity and intergroup bias: An
interconnection of self and others. European Journal of Social Psychology, 28(6),
963–980.

Gajendran, R. S., & Joshi, A. (2012). Innovation in globally distributed teams: The role of
LMX, communication frequency, and member influence on team decisions. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 97(6), 1252–1261.

Gibson, C. B., & Gibbs, J. L. (2006). Unpacking the concept of virtuality: The effects of
geographic dispersion, electronic dependence, dynamic structure, and national di-
versity on team innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 51(3), 451–495.

Gibson, J. (1977). The theory of affordances. In R. E. Shaw, & J. Bransford (Eds.).
Perceiving, acting, and knowing (pp. 67–82). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Association.

Giles, J. (2005). Internet encyclopaedias go head to head. Nature, 438, 900–901.
Gillespie, R. B., Colgate, J. E., & Peshkin, M. A. (2001). A general framework for robot

control. IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation, 17(4), 391–401.
Gilson, L. L., Maynard, M. T., Jones Young, N. C., Vartiainen, M., & Hakonen, M. (2015).

Virtual teams research: 10 years, 10 themes, and 10 opportunities. Journal of
Management, 41(5), 1313–1337.

Gluckler, J., & Schrott, G. (2007). Leadership and performance in virtual teams: Exploring
brokerage in electronic communication. International Journal of e-Collaboration, 3,
31–52.

Goh, S., & Wasko, M. (2012). The effects of leader-member exchange on member

L. Larson and L.A. DeChurch The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101377

15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0030
https://www.oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/oi/authority.20110803095426960
https://www.oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/oi/authority.20110803095426960
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0065
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/02/world/asia/boeing-max-8-lion-air.html
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/02/world/asia/boeing-max-8-lion-air.html
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0085
https://www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/QVPR1K7D
https://www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/QVPR1K7D
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0135
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1707.04775.pdf
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1707.04775.pdf
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0150
https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Business%20Functions/McKinsey%20Analytics/Our%20Insights/An%20executives%20guide%20to%20AI/Executives-guide-to-AI
https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Business%20Functions/McKinsey%20Analytics/Our%20Insights/An%20executives%20guide%20to%20AI/Executives-guide-to-AI
https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Business%20Functions/McKinsey%20Analytics/Our%20Insights/An%20executives%20guide%20to%20AI/Executives-guide-to-AI
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/digital-mckinsey/our-insights/where-machines-could-replace-humans-and-where-they-cant-yet
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/digital-mckinsey/our-insights/where-machines-could-replace-humans-and-where-they-cant-yet
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/digital-mckinsey/our-insights/where-machines-could-replace-humans-and-where-they-cant-yet
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/artificial-intelligence/notes-from-the-ai-frontier-applications-and-value-of-deep-learning
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/artificial-intelligence/notes-from-the-ai-frontier-applications-and-value-of-deep-learning
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0350


performance in virtual world teams. Journal of the Association for Information Systems,
13(10), 861–885.

Gombolay, M. C., Gutierrez, R. A., Clarke, S. G., Sturla, G. F., & Shah, J. A. (2015).
Decision-making authority, team efficiency and human worker satisfaction in mixed
human–robot teams. Autonomous Robots, 39(3), 293–312.

Gomez-Zara, D., Paras, M., Twyman, M., Lane, J. N., DeChurch, L. A., & Contractor, N. S.
(2019, April). Who would you like to work with? Proceedings of the 2019 CHI con-
ference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 659). ACM.

Green, D. D., Walker, C., Alabulththim, Smith, D., & Phillips, M. (2018). Fueling the gig
economy: A case study evaluation of Upwork.com. Management Economics Research
Journal, 4(2018), 104–112.

Gronn, P. (2008). The future of distributed leadership. Journal of Educational
Administration, 46(2), 141–158.

Groom, V., & Nass, C. (2007). Can robots be teammates? Benchmarks in human–robot
teams. Interaction Studies, 8(3), 483–500.

Gu, B., Konana, P., Rajagopalan, B., & Chen, H. W. M. (2007). Competition among virtual
communities and user valuation: The case of investing-related communities.
Information Systems Research, 18(1), 68–85.

Gupta, A. K., & Govindarajan, V. (2000). Knowledge flows within multinational cor-
porations. Strategic Management Journal, 21(4), 473–496.

Hackman, J. R. (2012). From causes to conditions in group research. Journal of
Organizational Behavior, 33(3), 428–444.

Hambley, L. A., O’Neill, T. A., & Kline, T. J. (2007). Virtual team leadership: The effects of
leadership style and communication medium on team interaction styles and out-
comes. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 103(1), 1–20.

Hancock, P. A., Billings, D. R., Schaefer, K. E., Chen, J. Y., De Visser, E. J., & Parasuraman,
R. (2011). A meta-analysis of factors affecting trust in human-robot interaction.
Human Factors, 53(5), 517–527.

Harris, A. M., Gomez-Zara, D., DeChurch, L. A., & Contractor, N. S. (2019). Joining to-
gether online: The trajectory of CSCW scholarship on group formation. Proceedings of
ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 3(CSCW).

Hedlund, J., Ilgen, D. R., & Hollenbeck, J. R. (1998). Decision accuracy in computer-
mediated versus face-to-face decision-making teams. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 76(1), 30–47.

Hoch, J. E., & Kozlowski, S. W. (2014). Leading virtual teams: Hierarchical leadership,
structural supports, and shared team leadership. Journal of Applied Psychology, 99(3),
390–403.

Hoffman, G. (2013, June). Evaluating fluency in human-robot collaboration. International
conference on human-robot interaction (HRI), workshop on human robot collaboration.
Vol. 381. International conference on human-robot interaction (HRI), workshop on human
robot collaboration (pp. 1–8).

Howe, J. (2006, 2 June). Crowdsourcing: A definition [weblog]. Retrieved from http://
crowdsourcing.typepad.com/cs/2006/06/crowdsourcing_a.html.

Hwang, E. H., Singh, P. V., & Argote, L. (2015). Knowledge sharing in online commu-
nities: Learning to cross geographic and hierarchical boundaries. Organization Science,
26(6), 1593–1611.

Iacovides, I., Jennett, C., Cornish-Trestrail, C., & Cox, A. L. (2013, April). Do games attract
or sustain engagement in citizen science?: A study of volunteer motivations. CHI’13
extended abstracts on human factors in computing systems (pp. 1101–1106). ACM.

InnoCentive (2019). Retrieved from https://www.innocentive.com/.
Jarvenpaa, S. L., & Leidner, D. E. (1999). Communication and trust in global virtual

teams. Organization Science, 10(6), 791–815.
Johns, G. (2006). The essential impact of context on organizational behavior. Academy of

Management Review, 31(2), 386–408.
Johns, G. (2017). Reflections on the 2016 decade award: Incorporating context in orga-

nizational research. Academy of Management Review, 42(4), 577–595.
Johns, G. (2018). Advances in the treatment of context in organizational research. Annual

Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior, 5, 21–46.
Johnson, S. D., Suriya, C., Yoon, S. W., Berrett, J. V., & La Fleur, J. (2002). Team de-

velopment and group processes of virtual learning teams. Computers & Education,
39(4), 379–393.

Joshi, A., Lazarova, M. B., & Liao, H. (2009). Getting everyone on board: The role of
inspirational leadership in geographically dispersed teams. Organization Science,
20(1), 240–252.

Jung, M., & Hinds, P. (2018). Robots in the wild: A time for more robust theories of
human-robot interaction. ACM Transactions on Human-Robot Interaction (THRI), 7(1)
(2:1-2:5).

Jung, M. F. (2017, March). Affective grounding in human-robot interaction. 2017 12th
ACM/IEEE international conference on human-robot interaction (HRI) (pp. 263–273).
IEEE.

Jung, M. F., Lee, J. J., DePalma, N., Adalgeirsson, S. O., Hinds, P. J., & Breazeal, C. (2013,
February). Engaging robots: Easing complex human-robot teamwork using back-
channeling. Proceedings of the 2013 conference on computer supported cooperative work
(pp. 1555–1566). ACM.

Jung, M. F., Martelaro, N., & Hinds, P. J. (2015, March). Using robots to moderate team
conflict: The case of repairing violations. Proceedings of the tenth annual ACM/IEEE
international conference on human-robot interaction (pp. 229–236). ACM.

Kanawattanachai, P., & Yoo, Y. (2007). The impact of knowledge coordination on virtual
team performance over time. MIS Quarterly, 31(4), 783–808.

Kane, G. C., Majchrzak, A., Johnson, J., & Chen, G. (2009). A longitudinal model of
perspective making and perspective taking within fluid online collectives. Proceedings
of the international conference on information systems (ICIS)Phoenix, AZ: AIS Electronic
Library (Paper 10).

Kayworth, T. R., & Leidner, D. E. (2002). Leadership effectiveness in global virtual teams.
Journal of Management Information Systems, 18(3), 7–40.

Kellogg, K., Valentine, M., & Christin, A. (2019). Algorithms at work: The new contested

terrain of control. Academy of Management Annals. https://doi.org/10.5465/annals.
2018.0174 Retrieved from.

Kepuska, V., & Bohouta, G. (2018, January). Next-generation of virtual personal assistants
(microsoft cortana, apple siri, amazon alexa and google home). 2018 IEEE 8th annual
computing and communication workshop and conference (CCWC) (pp. 99–103). IEEE.

Kirkman, B. L., & Mathieu, J. E. (2005). The dimensions and antecedents of team vir-
tuality. Journal of Management, 31(5), 700–718.

Kittur, A., & Kraut, R. E. (2008, November). Harnessing the wisdom of crowds in wiki-
pedia: Quality through coordination. Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on
computer supported cooperative work (pp. 37–46). ACM.

Kittur, A., & Kraut, R. E. (2010, February). Beyond Wikipedia: Coordination and conflict
in online production groups. Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on computer
supported cooperative work (pp. 215–224). ACM.

Kittur, A., Nickerson, J. V., Bernstein, M., Gerber, E., Shaw, A., Zimmerman, J., ... Horton,
J. (2013, February). The future of crowd work. Proceedings of the 2013 conference on
computer supported cooperative work (pp. 1301–1318). ACM.

Kittur, A., Pendleton, B., & Kraut, R. E. (2009, October). Herding the cats: The influence of
groups in coordinating peer production. Proceedings of the 5th international symposium
on wikis and open collaboration (pp. 7). ACM.

Kolbjørnsrud, V., Amico, R., & Thomas, R. J. (2016). How artificial intelligence will re-
define management [PDF]. Retrieved from https://www.pega.com/system/files/
resources/2018-05/hbr-how-ai-will-redefine-management.pdf.

Kotlarsky, J., & Oshri, I. (2005). Social ties, knowledge sharing and successful colla-
boration in globally distributed system development projects. European Journal of
Information Systems, 14(1), 37–48.

Kozlowski, S. W., & Ilgen, D. R. (2006). Enhancing the effectiveness of work groups and
teams. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 7(3), 77–124.

Kozlowski, S. W., Mak, S., & Chao, G. T. (2016). Team-centric leadership: An integrative
review. Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior, 3,
21–54.

Lanfranco, A. R., Castellanos, A. E., Desai, J. P., & Meyers, W. C. (2004). Robotic surgery:
A current perspective. Annals of Surgery, 239(1), 14.

LaPlante, R., Silberman, M. S., & Metall, I. (2016). Building trust in crowd worker forums:
Worker ownership, governance, and work outcomes. Proceedings of WebSci16. ACM.

Lau, D. C., & Murnighan, J. K. (2005). Interactions within groups and subgroups: The
effects of demographic faultlines. Academy of Management Journal, 48(4), 645–659.

Lee, J. D., & See, K. A. (2004). Trust in automation: Designing for appropriate reliance.
Human Factors, 46(1), 50–80.

Lee, M. K., Kiesler, S., Forlizzi, J., & Rybski, P. (2012). Ripple effects of an embedded
social agent: A field study of a social robot in the workplace. Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 695–704). ACM May.

Lee, S. W., Krosnick, R., Park, S. Y., Keelean, B., Vaidya, S., O’Keefe, S. D., & Lasecki, W. S.
(2018). Exploring real-time collaboration in crowd-powered systems through a UI
design tool. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 2(CSCW), 104.

Leonardi, P., & Contractor, N. (2018). Better people analytics. Harvard Business Review,
96(6), 70–81.

Leonardi, P. M. (2011). When flexible routines meet flexible technologies: Affordance,
constraint, and the imbrication of human and material agencies.MIS Quarterly, 35(1),
147–167.

Leonardi, P. M. (2012). Materiality, sociomateriality, and socio-technical systems: What
do these terms mean? How are they related? Do we need them? In P. M. Leonardi, B.
A. Nardi, & J. Kallinikos (Eds.). Materiality and organizing: Social interaction in a
technological world (pp. 25–48). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Liden, R. C., & Antonakis, J. (2009). Considering context in psychological leadership
research. Human Relations, 62(11), 1587–1605.

Lifshitz-Assaf, H. (2018). Dismantling knowledge boundaries at NASA: The critical role of
professional identity in open innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 63(4),
746–782.

Lim, B. C., & Klein, K. J. (2006). Team mental models and team performance: A field
study of the effects of team mental model similarity and accuracy. Journal of
Organizational Behavior: The International Journal of Industrial, Occupational and
Organizational Psychology and Behavior, 27(4), 403–418.

Luther, K., & Bruckman, A. (2008, November). Leadership in online creative collabora-
tion. Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on computer supported cooperative work
(pp. 343–352). ACM.

Luther, K., Fiesler, C., & Bruckman, A. (2013, February). Redistributing leadership in
online creative collaboration. Proceedings of the 2013 conference on computer supported
cooperative work (pp. 1007–1022). ACM.

Lund, S., Manyika, J., Segel, L., Dua, A., Hancock, B., Rutherford, S., & Macon, B. (2019,
July). The future of work in America: People and places, today and tomorrow.
Retrieved from https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/future-of-work/the-
future-of-work-in-america-people-and-places-today-and-tomorrow.

Lykourentzou, I., Antoniou, A., Naudet, Y., & Dow, S. P. (2016, February). Personality
matters: Balancing for personality types leads to better outcomes for crowd teams.
Proceedings of the 19th ACM conference on computer-supported cooperative work & social
computing (pp. 260–273). ACM.

Lykourentzou, I., Kraut, R. E., & Dow, S. P. (2017). Team dating leads to better online ad
hoc collaborations. Proceedings of the 2017 ACM conference on computer supported
cooperative work and social computing (pp. 2330–2343). ACM February.

Lykourentzou, I., Wang, S., Kraut, R. E., & Dow, S. P. (2016). Team dating: A self-orga-
nized team formation strategy for collaborative crowdsourcing. Proceedings of the
2016 CHI conference extended abstracts on human factors in computing systems (pp.
1243–1249). ACM May.

Majchrzak, A., Faraj, S., Kane, G. C., & Azad, B. (2013). The contradictory influence of
social media affordances on online communal knowledge sharing. Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication, 19(1), 38–55.

L. Larson and L.A. DeChurch The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101377

16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0420
http://crowdsourcing.typepad.com/cs/2006/06/crowdsourcing_a.html
http://crowdsourcing.typepad.com/cs/2006/06/crowdsourcing_a.html
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0435
https://www.innocentive.com/
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0505
https://doi.org/10.5465/annals.2018.0174
https://doi.org/10.5465/annals.2018.0174
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0540
https://www.pega.com/system/files/resources/2018-05/hbr-how-ai-will-redefine-management.pdf
https://www.pega.com/system/files/resources/2018-05/hbr-how-ai-will-redefine-management.pdf
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0565
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0565
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0570
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0570
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0575
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0575
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0580
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0580
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0595
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0595
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0600
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0600
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0600
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0605
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0605
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0605
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0605
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0610
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0610
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0615
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0615
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0615
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0620
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0620
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0620
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0620
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0625
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0625
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0625
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0630
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0630
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0630
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/future-of-work/the-future-of-work-in-america-people-and-places-today-and-tomorrow
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/future-of-work/the-future-of-work-in-america-people-and-places-today-and-tomorrow
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0640
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0640
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0640
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0640
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0645
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0645
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0645
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0650
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0650
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0650
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0650
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0655
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0655
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0655


Majchrzak, A., Wagner, C., Riehle, D., Thoeny, P., Shah, S., & Cunningham, W. (2007).
The role of shapers in knowledge-sharing. Virtuality and virtualization (pp. 383–386).
Boston, MA: Springer.

Malhotra, A., Majchrzak, A., & Rosen, B. (2007). Leading virtual teams. Academy of
Management Perspectives, 21(1), 60–70.

Malone, T. W., Laubacher, R., & Dellarocas, C. (2010). The collective intelligence genome.
MIT Sloan Management Review, 51(3), 21–31.

Maloney, M. M., Bresman, H., Zellmer-Bruhn, M. E., & Beaver, G. R. (2016).
Contextualization and context theorizing in teams research: A look back and a path
forward. Academy of Management Annals, 10(1), 891–942.

Manyika, J., Chui, M., Miremadi, M., Bughin, J., Willmott, P., & Dewhurst, M. (2017,
January). Harnessing automation for a future that works. Retrieved from https://
www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/digital-disruption/harnessing-automation-
for-a-future-that-works.

Marks, M. A., Mathieu, J. E., & Zaccaro, S. J. (2001). A temporally based framework and
taxonomy of team processes. Academy of Management Review, 26(3), 356–376.

Marlow, J., Dabbish, L., & Herbsleb, J. (2013). Impression formation in online peer
production: Activity traces and personal profiles in github. Proceedings of the 2013
conference on computer supported cooperative work (pp. 117–128). ACM February.

Marlow, S. L., Lacerenza, C. N., & Salas, E. (2017). Communication in virtual teams: A
conceptual framework and research agenda. Human Resource Management Review,
27(4), 575–589.

Marr, B. (2019). The future of work: 5 important ways jobs will change in the 4th in-
dustrial revolution. Retrieved from https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/
2019/07/15/the-future-of-work-5-important-ways-jobs-will-change-in-the-4th-
industrial-revolution/#5364944454c7.

Marrone, J. A. (2010). Team boundary spanning: A multilevel review of past research and
proposals for the future. Journal of Management, 36(4), 911–940.

Martins, L. L., Gilson, L. L., & Maynard, M. T. (2004). Virtual teams: What do we know
and where do we go from here? Journal of Management, 30(6), 805–835.

Maznevski, M. L., & Chudoba, K. M. (2000). Bridging space over time: Global virtual team
dynamics and effectiveness. Organization Science, 11(5), 473–492.

McAfee, A., Brynjolfsson, E., Goldbloom, A., & Howard, J. (2014, September). Artificial
intelligence meets the C-suite [interview by R. Kirkland]. Retrieved from https://
www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/strategy-and-corporate-finance/our-
insights/artificial-intelligence-meets-the-c-suite.

McGrath, J. E. (1962). Leadership behavior: Some requirements for leadership training.
Washington, DC: U.S. Civil Service Commission, Office of Career Development.

Meyer, E. (2010). The four keys to success with virtual teams. Retrieved from http://
www.forbes.com/2010/08/19/virtual-teams-meetings-leadership-managing-
cooperation.html.

Meyer, E. (2015). When culture doesn't translate. Harvard Business Review, 93(10), 66–72.
Montoya-Weiss, M. M., Massey, A. P., & Song, M. (2001). Getting it together: Temporal

coordination and conflict management in global virtual teams. Academy of
Management Journal, 44(6), 1251–1262.

Morgeson, F. P., DeRue, D. S., & Karam, E. P. (2010). Leadership in teams: A functional
approach to understanding leadership structures and processes. Journal of
Management, 36(1), 5–39.

Morgeson, F. P., Lindoerfer, D., & Loring, D. J. (2010). Developing team leadership
capability. In E. V. Velsor, C. D. McCauley, & M. N. Ruderman (Eds.). The center for
creative leadership handbook of leadership development (pp. 285–312). (3rd ed.). San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Mortenson, M., & Haas, M. R. (2018). Rethinking teams: From bounded membership to
dynamic participation. Organization Science, 29(2), 341–355.

MTurk (2018). Retrieved from https://www.mturk.com/.
Nass, C., Fogg, B. J., & Moon, Y. (1996). Can computers be teammates? International

Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 45(6), 669–678.
Nicolaides, V. C., LaPort, K. A., Chen, T. R., Tomassetti, A. J., Weis, E. J., Zaccaro, S. J., &

Cortina, J. M. (2014). The shared leadership of teams: A meta-analysis of proximal,
distal, and moderating relationships. The Leadership Quarterly, 25(5), 923–942.

Oborn, E., Barrett, M., & Dawson, S. (2013). Distributed leadership in policy formulation:
A sociomaterial perspective. Organization Studies, 34(2), 253–276.

Oc, B. (2018). Contextual leadership: A systematic review of how contextual factors shape
leadership and its outcomes. The Leadership Quarterly, 29(1), 218–235.

Orlikowski, W., & Scott, S. (2015). The algorithm and the crowd: Considering the ma-
teriality of service innovation. MIS Quarterly, 39(1), 201–216.

Orlikowski, W. J. (2007). Sociomaterial practices: Exploring technology at work.
Organization Studies, 28(9), 1435–1448.

Orlikowski, W. J., & Scott, S. V. (2008). 10 sociomateriality: Challenging the separation of
technology, work and organization. The Academy of Management Annals, 2(1),
433–474.

Oshri, I., Van Fenema, P., & Kotlarsky, J. (2008). Knowledge transfer in globally dis-
tributed teams: The role of transactive memory. Information Systems Journal, 18(6),
593–616.

Osterlund, C., Mugar, G., Jackson, C. B., Hassman, K. D., & Crowston, K. (2014).
Socializing the crowd: Learning to talk in citizen science. Academy of management
annual meetingPhiladelphia, PA: OCIS Division January.

Parry, K., Cohen, M., & Bhattacharya, S. (2016). Rise of the machines: A critical con-
sideration of automated leadership decision making in organizations. Group &
Organization Management, 41(5), 571–594.

Paul, D. L., & McDaniel, R. R., Jr. (2004). A field study of the effect of interpersonal trust
on virtual collaborative relationship performance. MIS Quarterly, 28(2), 183–227.

Pearce, C. L., & Conger, J. A. (2003). Shared leadership: Reframing the hows and whys of
leadership. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Penner, L. A., & Finkelstein, M. A. (1998). Dispositional and structural determinants of
volunteerism. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(2), 525–537.

Pentland, A. S. (2012). The new science of building great teams. Harvard Business Review,
90(4), 60–69.

Petriglieri, G., Ashford, S. J., & Wrzesniewski, A. (2019). Agony and ecstasy in the gig
economy: Cultivating holding environments for precarious and personalized work
identities. Administrative Science Quarterly, 64(1), 124–170.

Poole, M. S., & DeSanctis, G. (1992). Microlevel structuration in computer-supported
group decision making. Human Communication Research, 19(1), 5–49.

Powell, A., Piccoli, G., & Ives, B. (2004). Virtual teams: A review of current literature and
directions for future research. ACM SIGMIS Database: the DATABASE for Advances in
Information Systems, 35(1), 6–36.

Purvanova, R. K., & Bono, J. E. (2009). Transformational leadership in context: Face-to-
face and virtual teams. The Leadership Quarterly, 20(3), 343–357.

Pyle, D., & San Jose, C. (2015). An executive’s guide to machine learning. The McKinsey
Quarterly, 3, 44–53.

Rahman, H., Roy, S. B., Thirumuruganathan, S., Amer-Yahia, S., & Das, G. (2018).
Optimized group formation for solving collaborative tasks. The VLDB Journal, 28(1),
1–23.

Rani, P., Sarkar, N., Smith, C. A., & Kirby, L. D. (2004). Anxiety detecting robotic sys-
tem–towards implicit human-robot collaboration. Robotica, 22(1), 85–95.

Raymond, E. (1999). The cathedral and the bazaar. Knowledge, Technology, and Policy,
12(3), 23–49.

Resnick, P., & Kraut, R. (2011). Introduction. In R. E. Kraut, & P. Resnick (Eds.). Evidence-
based social design: Mining the social sciences to build online communities. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

Retelny, D., Bernstein, M. S., & Valentine, M. A. (2017). No workflow can ever be enough:
How crowdsourcing workflows constrain complex work. New York, NY, USA: ACM.

Retelny, D., Robaszkiewicz, S., To, A., Lasecki, W. S., Patel, J., Rahmati, N., ... Bernstein,
M. S. (2014, October). Expert crowdsourcing with flash teams. Proceedings of the 27th
annual ACM symposium on user interface software and technology (pp. 75–85). ACM.

Robey, D., Khoo, H., & Powers, C. (2000). Situated learning in cross-functional virtual
teams. Technical Communication, 47(1), 51–66.

Salehi, N., McCabe, A., Valentine, M., & Bernstein, M. (2017). Huddler: Convening stable
and familiar crowd teams despite unpredictable availability. Proceedings of the 2017
ACM conference on computer supported cooperative work and social computing (pp.
1700–1713). ACM.

Schwartz, J., Collins, L., Stockton, H., Wagner, D., & Walsh, B. (2017). The future of work:
The augmented workforce. Retrieved from https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/
insights/focus/human-capital-trends/2017/future-workforce-changing-nature-of-
work.html.

Sosik, J. J., Kahai, S. S., & Avolio, B. J. (1998). Transformational leadership and di-
mensions of creativity: Motivating idea generation in computer-mediated groups.
Creativity Research Journal, 11(2), 111–121.

Sproull, L., & Kiesler, S. (1991). Connections: New ways of working in the networked orga-
nization. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Stewart, G. L., & Manz, C. C. (1995). Leadership for self-managing work teams: A ty-
pology and integrative model. Human Relations, 48(7), 747–770.

Straus, S. G., & McGrath, J. E. (1994). Does the medium matter? The interaction of task
type and technology on group performance and member reactions. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 79(1), 87–97.

Strier, K. (2017). How do you run the business when AI is steering the ship? EY. Retrieved
from https://consulting.ey.com/steer-business-ai-running-ship/.

Strohmeier, S., & Piazza, F. (2015). Artificial intelligence techniques in human resource
management—A conceptual exploration. Intelligent techniques in engineering manage-
ment (pp. 149–172). Cham: Springer.

Talamadupula, K., Briggs, G., Chakraborti, T., Scheutz, M., & Kambhampati, S. (2014,
September). Coordination in human-robot teams using mental modeling and plan
recognition. 2014 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems
(pp. 2957–2962). IEEE.

Taylor, K. (2017). The future of corporate learning: Stepping into another dimension.
Training industry magazine. Jul/Aug. Retrieved from https://trainingindustry.com/
magazine/july-aug-2017/the-future-of-corporate-learning-stepping-into-another-
dimension/.

Thorpe, R., Gold, J., & Lawler, J. (2011). Locating distributed leadership. International
Journal of Management Reviews, 13(3), 239–250.

Townsend, A. M., DeMarie, S. M., & Hendrickson, A. R. (1998). Virtual teams: Technology
and the workplace of the future. Academy of Management Perspectives, 12(3), 17–29.

Treem, J. W., & Leonardi, P. M. (2013). Social media use in organizations: Exploring the
affordances of visibility, editability, persistence, and association. Annals of the
International Communication Association, 36(1), 143–189.

Twyman, M. (2019). Relational mechanisms in team self-assembly: A network and compu-
tational approach. Unpublished doctoral dissertationNorthwestern University.

Tyran, K. L., Tyran, C. K., & Shepherd, M. (2003). Exploring emerging leadership in
virtual teams. Virtual teams that work: Creating conditions for virtual team effectiveness
(pp. 183–195). .

Upwork (2019). Retrieved from https://www.upwork.com/.
Van Den Berg, J., Miller, S., Duckworth, D., Hu, H., Wan, A., Fu, X. Y., ... Abbeel, P. (2010,

May). Superhuman performance of surgical tasks by robots using iterative learning
from human-guided demonstrations. 2010 IEEE international conference on robotics
and automation (pp. 2074–2081). IEEE.

Wagner, C., & Majchrzak, A. (2006). Enabling customer-centricity using wikis and the
wiki way. Journal of Management Information Systems, 23(3), 17–43.

Wakefield, R. L., Leidner, D. E., & Garrison, G. (2008). Research note—A model of con-
flict, leadership, and performance in virtual teams. Information Systems Research,
19(4), 434–455.

Wang, D., Waldman, D. A., & Zhang, Z. (2014). A meta-analysis of shared leadership and
team effectiveness. Journal of Applied Psychology, 99(2), 181–198.

L. Larson and L.A. DeChurch The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101377

17

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0660
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0660
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0660
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0665
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0665
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0670
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0670
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0675
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0675
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0675
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/digital-disruption/harnessing-automation-for-a-future-that-works
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/digital-disruption/harnessing-automation-for-a-future-that-works
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/digital-disruption/harnessing-automation-for-a-future-that-works
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0685
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0685
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0690
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0690
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0690
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0695
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0695
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0695
https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2019/07/15/the-future-of-work-5-important-ways-jobs-will-change-in-the-4th-industrial-revolution/#5364944454c7
https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2019/07/15/the-future-of-work-5-important-ways-jobs-will-change-in-the-4th-industrial-revolution/#5364944454c7
https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2019/07/15/the-future-of-work-5-important-ways-jobs-will-change-in-the-4th-industrial-revolution/#5364944454c7
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0705
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0705
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0710
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0710
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0715
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0715
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/strategy-and-corporate-finance/our-insights/artificial-intelligence-meets-the-c-suite
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/strategy-and-corporate-finance/our-insights/artificial-intelligence-meets-the-c-suite
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/strategy-and-corporate-finance/our-insights/artificial-intelligence-meets-the-c-suite
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0725
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0725
http://www.forbes.com/2010/08/19/virtual-teams-meetings-leadership-managing-cooperation.html
http://www.forbes.com/2010/08/19/virtual-teams-meetings-leadership-managing-cooperation.html
http://www.forbes.com/2010/08/19/virtual-teams-meetings-leadership-managing-cooperation.html
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0735
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0740
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0740
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0740
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0745
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0745
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0745
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0750
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0750
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0750
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0750
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0755
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0755
https://www.mturk.com/
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0765
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0765
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0770
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0770
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0770
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0775
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0775
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0780
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0780
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0785
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0785
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0790
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0790
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0795
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0795
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0795
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0800
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0800
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0800
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0805
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0805
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0805
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0810
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0810
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0810
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0815
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0815
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0820
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0820
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0825
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0825
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0830
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0830
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0835
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0835
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0835
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0840
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0840
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0845
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0845
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0845
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0850
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0850
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0855
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0855
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0860
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0860
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0860
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0865
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0865
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0870
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0870
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0875
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0875
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0875
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0880
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0880
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0885
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0885
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0885
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0890
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0890
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0895
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0895
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0895
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0895
https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/focus/human-capital-trends/2017/future-workforce-changing-nature-of-work.html
https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/focus/human-capital-trends/2017/future-workforce-changing-nature-of-work.html
https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/focus/human-capital-trends/2017/future-workforce-changing-nature-of-work.html
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0905
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0905
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0905
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0910
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0910
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0915
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0915
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0920
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0920
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0920
https://consulting.ey.com/steer-business-ai-running-ship/
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0930
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0930
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0930
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0935
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0935
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0935
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0935
https://trainingindustry.com/magazine/july-aug-2017/the-future-of-corporate-learning-stepping-into-another-dimension/
https://trainingindustry.com/magazine/july-aug-2017/the-future-of-corporate-learning-stepping-into-another-dimension/
https://trainingindustry.com/magazine/july-aug-2017/the-future-of-corporate-learning-stepping-into-another-dimension/
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0945
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0945
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0950
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0950
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0955
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0955
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0955
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0960
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0960
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0965
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0965
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0965
https://www.upwork.com/
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0975
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0975
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0975
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0975
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0980
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0980
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0985
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0985
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0985
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0990
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0990


Warkentin, M. E., Sayeed, L., & Hightower, R. (1997). Virtual teams versus face-to-face
teams: An exploratory study of a web-based conference system. Decision Sciences,
28(4), 975–996.

Weber, S. (2004). The success of open source. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wellers, D., Elliott, T., & Noga, M. (2017). 8 ways machine learning is improving com-

panies' work processes [PDF]. Retrieved from https://starlab-alliance.com/wp-
content/uploads/2017/09/Machine-Learning-HBR.pdf.

Wen, M., Maki, K., Dow, S., Herbsleb, J. D., & Rose, C. (2017). Supporting virtual team
formation through community-wide deliberation. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-
Computer Interaction, 1(CSCW), 109.

Whitford, T., & Moss, S. A. (2009). Transformational leadership in distributed work
groups: The moderating role of follower regulatory focus and goal orientation.
Communication Research, 36(6), 810–837.

Wikipedia contributors (2019, October 7). Wikipedia. Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
Retrieved October 7, 2019, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=
Wikipedia&oldid=920002728.

Wilson, H. J., & Daugherty, P. R. (2018). Collaborative intelligence: Humans and AI are
joining forces. Harvard Business Review, 96(5), 20–21.

Yates, D., Wagner, C., & Majchrzak, A. (2010). Factors affecting shapers of organizational
wikis. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 61(3),
543–554.

Yen, J., Yin, J., Ioerger, T. R., Miller, M. S., Xu, D., & Volz, R. A. (2001). Cast:
Collaborative agents for simulating teamwork. International joint conference on arti-
ficial intelligence. Vol. 17, No. 1. International joint conference on artificial intelligence
(pp. 1135–1144). Lawrence Earlbaum Associates Ltd August.

Yip, J., Ernst, C., & Campbell, M. (2011). Boundary spanning leadership. Center for Creative
Leadership.

You, S., & Robert, L. P. (2018). Emotional attachment, performance, and viability in
teams collaborating with embodied physical action (EPA) robots. Journal of the
Association for Information Systems, 19(5), 377–407.

Yukl, G. (1998). Leadership in organizations (4th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall.

Zaccaro, S. J., Ardison, S. D., & Orvis, K. L. (2003). Leadership in virtual teams. In D. V.
Day, S. J. Zaccaro, & S. M. Halpin (Eds.). Leadership development for transforming or-
ganizations: Growing leadership for tomorrow (pp. 267–292). Mahwah, New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

Zaccaro, S. J., & Bader, P. (2003). E-leadership and the challenges of leading e-teams:
Minimizing the bad and maximizing the good. Organizational Dynamics, 31(4),
377–387.

Zaccaro, S. J., Rittman, A. L., & Marks, M. A. (2001). Team leadership. The Leadership
Quarterly, 12(4), 451–483.

Zack, M. H., & McKenney, J. L. (1995). Social context and interaction in ongoing com-
puter-supported management groups. Organization Science, 6(4), 394–422.

Zammuto, R. F., Griffith, T. L., Majchrzak, A., Dougherty, D. J., & Faraj, S. (2007).
Information technology and the changing fabric of organization. Organization Science,
18(5), 749–762.

Zhu, H., Kraut, R., & Kittur, A. (2012, February). Effectiveness of shared leadership in
online communities. Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on computer supported
cooperative work (pp. 407–416). ACM.

Zhu, H., Kraut, R. E., & Kittur, A. (2013). Effectiveness of shared leadership in Wikipedia.
Human Factors, 55(6), 1021–1043.

Zhu, H., Kraut, R. E., Wang, Y. C., & Kittur, A. (2011). Identifying shared leadership in
Wikipedia. Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems
(pp. 3431–3434). ACM May.

L. Larson and L.A. DeChurch The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101377

18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0995
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0995
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf0995
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1000
https://starlab-alliance.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/Machine-Learning-HBR.pdf
https://starlab-alliance.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/Machine-Learning-HBR.pdf
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1015
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia&oldid=920002728
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia&oldid=920002728
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30835-X/rf1090


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

The Leadership Quarterly

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua

Review

Natural experiments in leadership research: An introduction, review, and
guidelines
Jost Siewekea,∗, Simone Santonib
a Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Netherlands
b Cass Business School, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords:
Causal inference
Leadership
Instrumental variable design
Natural experiment
Regression discontinuity design
Topic modeling

A B S T R A C T

Endogeneity is a serious challenge for leadership research. To overcome the problem, researchers increasingly
rely upon experimental designs, such as laboratory and field experiments. In this paper, we argue that natural
experiments — in the form of standard natural experiments, instrumental variable, and regression discontinuity
designs — offer additional opportunities to infer causal relationships. We conduct a systematic, cross-dis-
ciplinary review of 87 studies that leverage natural experimental designs to inquire into a leadership topic. We
introduce the standard natural experiment, instrumental variable, and regression discontinuity design and use
topic modeling to analyze which leadership topics have been investigated using natural experimental designs.
Based on the review, we provide guidelines that we hope will assist scholars in discovering natural exogenous
variations, selecting the most suitable form of natural experiment and by mobilizing appropriate statistical
techniques and robustness checks. The paper is addressed to leadership and management scholars who aim to
use natural experiments to infer causal relationships.

Introduction

The community of leadership scholars has started to take important
steps to advance causal empirical research (Antonakis, 2017;
Antonakis, Bendahan, Jacquart, & Lalive, 2010; Banks, Gooty, Ross,
Williams, & Harrington, 2018). Along this line, Podsakoff and Podsakoff
(2019) refer to a methodological turn towards ‘experiments,’ docu-
mented by the recent surge in the number of publications that adopt an
experimental research design (e.g., Delfgaauw, Dur, & Souverijn,
forthcoming; Slater, Turner, Evans, & Jones, 2018; Yeow & Martin,
2013). Expanding on this turn, Podsakoff and Podsakoff (2019) also
provide a comprehensive introduction and guidelines regarding three
types of experimental design: laboratory experiments; field experi-
ments; and quasi-experiments.

Our review article aims to enrich the ‘experimental toolbox’ avail-
able to leadership scholars by emphasizing a fourth type of experiment,
namely, natural experiments. The key feature of natural experiments is
the presence of ‘naturally’ occurring events – such as new regulations

and laws, natural disasters, or economic and political crises – which
heterogeneously affect the units of a population (Dunning, 2012;
Harrison & List, 2004; Robinson, McNulty, & Krasno, 2009).1 Given that
these events generate random or as-if random variations in the en-
vironment, natural experiments mimic the experimental ideal in which
units (e.g., individuals, teams, organizations) are split into a treatment
and a control group, or, alternatively, receive different levels of treat-
ment. This setting enables causal inference even when the substantive
relationship at hand is difficult to investigate in a laboratory setting
and/or would require operating costly, impractical, or unethical field
experiments. Typical examples are the impact of political leaders on the
economic growth of a country (Jones & Olken, 2005) or the queen bee
phenomenon (Arvate, Galilea, & Todescat, 2018).

Although natural experiments are popular in economics (e.g.,
Angrist & Pischke, 2009) and the political sciences (e.g., Dunning,
2012), they have received less attention from management scholars
(notable exceptions are Arvate et al., 2018; de Vries, 2012; Flammer &
Bansal, 2017; Haack & Sieweke, 2018; Stoker, Garretsen, & Soudis,

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101338
Received 16 November 2018; Received in revised form 20 September 2019; Accepted 30 September 2019

∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: j.sieweke@vu.nl (J. Sieweke).

1 Natural experiments differ from other forms of experiments that involve observational data, such as quasi-experiments and field experiments. Specifically, in the
context of quasi-experiments, units self-select into the treatment or control condition (Shadish, Cook, & Campbell, 2002). On the contrary, in natural experiments, the
assignment procedure is random or as-if random (Dunning, 2012). In other words, units in a natural experiment should not have: (i) information about the treatment;
(ii) incentives and capacity to self-select into one of the experimental conditions. Also, natural experiments differ from field experiments, wherein scholars have
control over the experimental manipulation (for a review of field experiments in the social sciences see Baldassarri & Abascal, 2017).

The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

Available online 12 December 2019
1048-9843/ © 2019 Published by Elsevier Inc.

T

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/10489843
https://www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101338
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101338
mailto:j.sieweke@vu.nl
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101338
http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101338&domain=pdf


2019). The present study aims to create momentum around causal
empirical research on leadership through a systematic, cross-disciplinary
review of 87 studies regarding the field of leadership (Dinh et al., 2014;
Gardner, Lowe, Moss, Mahoney, & Cogliser, 2010) and which use nat-
ural experiment designs. In so doing, we pursue three analytically
distinct, yet interrelated goals. Firstly, we aim to understand how prior
natural experiments map onto the space of leadership topics in terms of
the total of 1156 research articles published in The Leadership Quarterly
between January 2000 and March 2019. Secondly, we introduce the
different types of natural experimental designs – i.e., the standard
natural experiment, the instrumental variable design, and the regres-
sion discontinuity design2– using concrete examples. Thirdly, we pro-
vide guidelines to assist leadership scholars in ‘discovering’ relevant
sources of natural experiments, identifying the most appropriate form
of natural experiment to operate, and, finally, in analyzing the data that
come from the diverse forms.

Methods

Retrieving natural experiment studies in the field of leadership

This systematic review focuses on 87 studies that leverage a natural
experiment design to inquire into phenomena or theoretical relation-
ships regarding the field of leadership (e.g., Gardner et al., 2010; Dinh
et al., 2014). We identified candidate studies via an electronic search
conducted within Scopus. We searched for business and management,
psychology, social sciences, or multidisciplinary journal articles with
the keywords ‘natural experiment,’ ‘regression discontinuity design,’ or
‘instrumental variable’ in the title, abstract, or set of author's generated
keywords.3 For January 2000–March 2019 – the timespan of our review
– the search resulted in 6917 unique items.4

The two authors independently went through each abstract and
retained all the empirical studies that fulfilled two criteria: First, the
work adopted at least one of the three forms of natural experiment,
namely, ‘standard natural experiments,’ ‘instrumental variables,’ and
‘regression discontinuity designs' (Dunning, 2012). Second, the work
addressed at least one leadership topic/theory included in Gardner
et al.’s review of the theoretical conversations that characterize The
Leadership Quarterly journal.5 Having completed the independent
screening phase, we validated the coding decisions. We thus considered
the full papers of the 87 studies that were temporarily filtered-in. Any
disagreement about the theoretical focus of each individual study was
reconciled through discussion and by evaluating the focal study against
the conceptual categories and examples presented in Gardner et al.
(2010) review. This led to the exclusion of five studies. Finally, the
results achieved via the Scopus database were complemented with a
Google Scholar search combining the above-mentioned keywords with
the term ‘leadership.’ This led to the inclusion of five additional studies.
Hence, our review was based on a set of 87 published articles.6

Fig. 1 illustrates the distribution of the studies with respect to the
form of natural experiment (Panel A) and the time period (Panel B)
involved. Standard natural experiments (N=40) and instrumental
variable designs (N=41) are the most popular forms of natural ex-
periments in leadership research, and, overall, their diffusion seems to
grow over time. Regression discontinuity designs are the least popular
form (N=8) and their use in the field of leadership is scattered over
the last ten years. Appendix A provides further descriptive elements
regarding the set of studies.

Characterizing the natural experiment studies

As stated in the Introduction, one of this paper's goals is to under-
stand ‘how’ natural experiment methods intersect with substantive to-
pics in the field of leadership. In order to do this, we used topic mod-
eling – a text mining tool rooted in computational linguistics and
natural language processing7– to assess how the studies retained map
onto the topics dealt with in The Leadership Quarterly. In our case, a
topic modeling approach has some advantages over manually coding
papers. First, it lets the ‘data speak’ as the study-to-topic pairing is re-
vealed inductively by analyzing the corpus of texts. Hence, the re-
searcher does not need to subjectively assign a study to an established,
theoretically derived topic. Second, topic modeling offers a nuanced
characterization of the substantive focus of a study. Not only is the
assignment of a document to a topic probabilistic, a document is also
related to multiple topics. In other words, an article that investigates
the firm level implications of gender diversity in top management teams
may reflect both the ‘strategic leadership’ and ‘gender diversity in
groups' categories that Gardner and colleagues map.

In terms of design, our topic modeling involves two phases. In the
first phase, we trained a Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model (Blei,
Ng, & Jordan, 2003) on the abstracts of the 1156 research articles8

published in the The Leadership Quarterly between January 2000 and
March 2019. Table 1 illustrates key estimates obtained using Mallet
(McCallum, 2002) and the Gensim (Řehůřek & Sojka, 2011) and spaCy
(Honnibal & Montani, 2017) libraries for Python. Each cell in the table
indicates the probability of a term w (e.g., ‘CEO’) of occurring in a topic
τ (e.g., Topic 2). The analysis of the term-topic pairs included in the
model reveals a series of substantive categories that seem consistent
with Gardner et al.’s review. The models emphasize topics such as ‘fe-
male leadership’ (Topic 1); ‘emotions and leadership’ (Topic 2);
‘transformational leadership’ (Topic 3) ‘development of leadership’
(Topic 4); ‘dyadic relations' (Topic 5); ‘cognition and leadership’ (Topic
6); ‘strategic leadership’ (Topic 7); ‘ethical leadership’ (Topic 8);
‘charismatic leadership’ (Topic 9); and ‘leadership in team and decision
groups' (Topic 10).

In the second phase, we used a folding-in strategy by ‘projecting’
each of the 87 natural experiments onto the trained LDA model. We
thus represented each retained study in terms of the very same ten
topics that represent the corpus of 1156 abstracts published in The
Leadership Quarterly between January 2000 and March 2019. This en-
abled us to characterize a natural experiment in terms of one or a few
salient topics (i.e., those that occur with a higher likelihood in the
document) or to allocate it as being leadership research. Appendix B
provides further descriptive elements about the estimation procedure
behind our LDA model. The Supplemental materials contain the data
and the Python code to reproduce the set of exhibits reported in the
paper.

2 We borrow this categorization from Dunning’s (2012) book.
3 The query we operated was as follows: TITLE-ABS-KEY (“natural experi-

ment*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“regression discontinuity design”) OR TITLE-ABS-
KEY (“instrumental variable*”) AND (LIMIT-TO (DOCTYPE, “ar”)). The out-
come of the query – in the form article-level metadata – is available in the
Supplemental materials.

4 Data were retrieved on April 5, 2019. Scientific publications may be af-
filiated with multiple subject areas. For example, an article published in The
Leadership Quarterly is associated with the ‘Business, Management and
Accounting,’ ‘Psychology,’ and ‘Social Sciences' categories. Hence, conducting a
separate, subject-by-subject search results in a higher number of publications
than a search that concatenates the multiple subjects together.

5 The Supplemental materials report the categories associated with each in-
dividual study.

6 The number of paper-research design instances we considered is higher than
the number of studies, because two studies (Dal Bó, E., Dal Bó, P., & Snyder,

(footnote continued)
2009; Dasgupta, 2018) use two research designs.

7 For a non-technical introduction to the topic, see Mohr and Bogdanov
(2013).

8 Editorial notes were not used to train the model.

J. Sieweke and S. Santoni The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

2



Literature review

Standard natural experiments

The standard natural experimental design was already used in the
first-ever natural experiment, in which Snow (1855) analyzed the
transmission of cholera in London. In its ‘simplest’ form, the standard
natural experiment resembles the design of a randomized experiment in
that there are two groups – the treatment and control group – with two
observations per group — a pre- and a post-treatment observation.9 As
shown in Fig. 2, we can estimate the causal effect of the treatment by

comparing the average change of the outcome variable y for the treated
units (λ+ δ) and controls (γ). Of course, the ‘simple’ form of the
standard natural experiment can be extended in several ways, such as
by adding additional treatment groups or by adding additional time
periods before and/or after the treatment (e.g., Matsa & Miller, 2013).

Whether the standard natural experiment provides a causal estimate
mainly depends on the qualities of the treatment. In the case of random
variations, such as lotteries, the assignment process needs to be truly
random (e.g., Starr, 1997). In the case of as-if random variations, the
assignment process needs to be independent of factors that are related
to the outcome and not affected by the unit's self-selection into treat-
ment or control conditions (Dunning, 2012). The second part of the
document deals with these aspects in more detail.

Standard natural experiment and leadership research
Table 2 reports the set of studies that draw upon the standard

Fig. 1. Counts of retrieved studies across forms of natural experiment and time. Notes.—‘Standard NE’ denotes the group of studies that use an average treatment on
the treated approach; ‘IV’ denotes the group of studies using the instrumental variable design; ‘RD’ denotes the group of studies using a regression discontinuity
design. Panel ‘A’ illustrates the group of studies across forms of NE experiments for the whole timespan; Panel ‘B’ accounts for the formation of the stock data reported
in Panel ‘A’. * ‘2019’ data concern the first quarter of the year only. The number of individual studies is 87; Dal Bó et al. (2009) is included in both the IV and RD
categories; Dasgupta (2018) is included both in the SNE and IV categories.

Table 1
Term-topic matrix.

Topic number Terms as lemmas

1 context woman difference power role gender practice female culture position
(0.042) (0.03) (0.024) (0.024) (0.02) (0.017) (0.017) (0.016) (0.013) (0.012)

2 perception affect role emotion positive emotional negative network influence collective
(0.034) (0.033) (0.03) (0.028) (0.028) (0.026) (0.026) (0.017) (0.016) (0.016)

3 transformational subordinate rating trait associate experience significant personality high analysis
(0.056) (0.043) (0.026) (0.021) (0.017) (0.016) (0.016) (0.016) (0.014) (0.014)

4 development perspective develop political include purpose interest view multiple year
(0.046) (0.027) (0.017) (0.015) (0.015) (0.013) (0.013) (0.012) (0.012) (0.01)

5 employee work lmx job supervisor perceive authentic mediate hypothesis satisfaction
(0.054) (0.048) (0.034) (0.023) (0.023) (0.021) (0.019) (0.018) (0.016) (0.015)

6 understand effective vision problem cognitive strategy lead dynamic proposition identify
(0.024) (0.02) (0.019) (0.017) (0.017) (0.015) (0.014) (0.013) (0.013) (0.013)

7 performance team member ceo management skill firm decision share strategic
(0.106) (0.085) (0.033) (0.03) (0.021) (0.019) (0.018) (0.018) (0.017) (0.015)

8 level increase ethical develop impact moral structure reveal practice integrity
(0.029) (0.024) (0.023) (0.019) (0.017) (0.016) (0.015) (0.014) (0.013) (0.012)

9 charismatic change manager time charisma style content crisis type managerial
(0.051) (0.041) (0.035) (0.03) (0.025) (0.018) (0.014) (0.013) (0.012) (0.01)

10 group effectiveness task condition identity individual emergence show response characteristic
(0.073) (0.04) (0.03) (0.023) (0.022) (0.021) (0.019) (0.017) (0.015) (0.014)

Notes. Estimations achieved with Mallet software and the Gensim library for Python; number of documents= 1156; number of topics= 10; terms are arranged in
descending order of likelihood to appear in topic i; the optimal number of topics to retain is based on the comparison and contrast of the coherence value of 29
competing models in the 1–29 topics range — see Appendix B for further details about the estimation procedure.

9 The standard natural experiment is also often referred to as “difference in
difference (DID)” design; yet, not all DID designs represent natural experiments,
e.g., if the assignment is based on self-selection or unobserved covariates and
not on an as-if randomization (Wing, Simon, & Bello-Gomez, 2018).

J. Sieweke and S. Santoni The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

3



natural experiment design to address a leadership-related topic. The
left-hand column indicates the short reference for the study; the re-
maining columns provide a substantive characterization of the study.
The right-hand columns present the inductive categorization of studies
as emerging from the topic modeling described in the previous section.
In the interest of clarity, we have just reported the two most salient
topics of each study — i.e., the topics with the highest chance of being
paired with the focal document.

Our topic model highlights the focus of the standard natural ex-
periments and consists of three core topics – ‘female leadership’ (Topic
1); ‘strategic leadership’ (Topic 7); and ‘ethical leadership’ (Topic 8) –
together with a series of other themes that, although less central, still
receive significant attention (see Topics 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, and 10). The
prominence of Topics 1, 7 and 8 is clear from Fig. 3, Panel A, which
shows the frequency with which salient topics appear in the documents.

The scatter plot in Panel B of Fig. 3 expands on the outcome of the
topic model by positioning each natural experiment in the topic space
that characterizes the population of articles published in The Leadership
Quarterly. The coordinates of each data point are produced via multi-
dimensional scaling. This allows us to create a shallow representation of
the 10-dimension space underlying the topic model. ‘Stars' are asso-
ciated with natural experiments. The Leadership Quarterly articles are
represented with circles that have been color-coded to reflect the
dominant topic of the document. The diagram highlights that: (i)
standard natural experiments map onto a narrow portion of the space,
whereas vast areas of leadership research have been barely or not im-
pacted at all by this form of causal research; (ii) an initial cluster of
studies emerges at the intersection of ‘female leadership’ and strategic
leadership (see the bottom right of the chart); (iii) a second cluster of
studies jointly investigate ‘ethical leadership’ and ‘nature of managerial
work’ subjects (see the middle left of the chart).

Standard natural experiment examples
Our review shows there is a significant number of studies using

standard natural experiments to address selected leadership-related
topics. We concentrate on three examples in order to provide leadership
scholars with insights into the application of the standard natural ex-
periment for inferring causal relationships.

The first study, by Beaman et al. (2012), uses a standard natural
experiment to analyze whether female leadership has an impact on
girls' career aspirations and educational attainment. The authors hy-
pothesize that a female leader will act as a role model for girls and
young women, and will thereby affect their career aspirations and
educational attainment. The authors argue that analyzing this re-
lationship in laboratory experiments is difficult, because participants
are exposed to the role model for a short period of time, whereas in
observational studies, people may self-select to certain role models
based on observed and unobserved characteristics. Beaman et al. (2012)
thus exploit the enactment of a law in India in 1993 that determined
that in some randomly selected villages, the position of chief councilor
was reserved for women. The law resulted into two treatment groups
and a control group. The first treatment group consists of villages in
which this position was reserved for women in one election (either
1998 or 2003); in the second treatment group, the position was re-
served for women in two elections (in 1998 and 2003); and in the
control group, the position was never reserved for women. The authors
collected survey data from 15 randomly selected households in each
village in 2006 and 2007. Their difference-in-means analyses show that
the gender gap in parents' career aspirations for their children was
much lower in villages in which the council positions had been reserved
for women twice compared to villages in which the position had been
reserved for women once or never. The analyses also indicate that the
gap in educational aspirations between boys and girls was much lower
in villages with female leaders than in villages with male leaders. Based
on some additional analyses, the authors conclude that the effects are
mainly caused by a role model effect; that is, female leaders provide a
role model both for parents and for girls. Overall, the standard natural
experiment by Beaman et al. (2012) provides important insights into
the causal effect of female leadership on (female) followers' aspirations.

In the second study, Matsa and Miller (2013) exploit the introduc-
tion of ‘gender quota’ policies in Norway to investigate how female
leadership influences strategic choices and outcomes, for example
corporate downscaling. The gender quotas forced all publicly listed
firms in Norway to increase the proportion of women on the board of
directors to 40% within two years. Because the gender quota policy
applied to all listed firms, it was not a random variation in the reg-
ulatory environment. However, the authors argue that the policy tar-
gets companies that are part of a broader population of Scandinavian
firms, that is, organizations facing relatively similar cultural and in-
stitutional factors. The Norwegian policy may therefore have an as-if-
random interpretation. Matsa and Miller (2013) used a matching ap-
proach in which they first pair treated (i.e., publicly listed) and un-
treated (i.e., unlisted) Norwegian firms, and, in the second step, linked
Norwegian firms to listed and unlisted firms located in Denmark, Fin-
land, and Sweden. The summary statistics showed that the treatment
and control group were similar in terms of most firm characteristics. To
analyze the causal effect of female leadership on strategic choices and
outcomes, the authors used the difference-in-differences and difference-
in-difference-in-differences10 analytical frameworks. They found that
the gender quota had a negative impact on firm profitability. In further
analyses, the authors showed that profit differentials were mainly at-
tributable to the fact that companies treated with the quota policy
tended to cut less jobs than their counterparts. To back up the causal
interpretation of their results, Matsa and Miller (2013) conducted
several robustness checks, such as testing for trends before the in-
troduction of the quota and testing whether the effects were stronger
for firms with fewer women on their board of directors. Overall, the
study provides causal empirical evidence supporting the effect of fe-
male leadership on firm performance as mediated by key strategic
choices.

Fig. 2. Visual representation of the standard natural experiment. Notes. The
underlying population regression function is y= γt+ λD+ δtD, where γ, λ,
and δ represent the systematic difference in the outcome across the treated and
control cases, the trend effect and the difference in the outcome that is due to
the treatment. For sake of clarity, we represent the case in which δ >0.

10 The difference-in-difference-in-differences framework is also referred to as
the ‘triple diff-in-diffs.’

J. Sieweke and S. Santoni The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

4



Table 2
Standard natural experiments — substantive focus.

Salient topics

1st topic 2nd topic

Study Topic label Prob. Topic label Prob.

Bae and Yi (2008) Charismatic leadership 0.134 Ethical leadership 0.133
Beaman, Duflo, Pande, and Topalova (2012) Transformational leadership 0.2 Female leadership 0.165
Belloc, Drago, and Galbiati (2016) Cognition and leadership 0.143 Development of leadership 0.134
Bhavnani (2017) Charismatic leadership 0.165 Female leadership 0.148
Breda and Ly (2015) Female leadership 0.204 Emotions and leadership 0.148
Brockman, Ma, and Ye (2015) Strategic leadership 0.332 Ethical leadership 0.102
Byrd, Fraser, Scott Lee, and Tartaroglu (2012) Strategic leadership 0.174 Female leadership 0.165
Bækgaard (2011) Leadership in teams 0.18 Female leadership 0.167
Chauchard (2014) Female leadership 0.137 Leadership in teams 0.127
Chen, Cumming, Hou, and Lee (2016) Strategic leadership 0.181 Female leadership 0.171
Cheng, Nagar, and Rajan (2005) Strategic leadership 0.173 Development of leadership 0.113
Cohen and Wang (2013) Leadership in teams 0.139 Development of leadership 0.128
Coman (2018) Development of leadership 0.149 Female leadership 0.131
Cox, Rosenbluth, and Thies (2000) Strategic leadership 0.155 Leadership in teams 0.14
Cuñat and Guadalupe (2009) Strategic leadership 0.194 Ethical leadership 0.159
Dahya and McConnell (2005) Female leadership 0.227 Emotions and leadership 0.108
Dasgupta (2018) Female leadership 0.123 Charismatic leadership 0.119
de Paola and Scoppa (2015) Female leadership 0.233 Leadership in teams 0.125
de Paola, Scoppa, and Lombardo (2010) Female leadership 0.322 Cognition and leadership 0.104
Gittell, Weinberg, Bennett, and Miller (2008) Dyadic relations 0.18 Emotions and leadership 0.13
Gormley, Matsa, and Milbourn (2012) Strategic leadership 0.202 Charismatic leadership 0.135
Guadalupe and Wulf (2010) Strategic leadership 0.179 Ethical leadership 0.127
Han and Zhang (2018) Female leadership 0.194 Strategic leadership 0.155
Hidalgo, Canello, and Lima-de Oliveira (2016) Female leadership 0.186 Emotions and leadership 0.126
Huber and Arceneaux (2007) Charismatic leadership 0.214 Ethical leadership 0.136
Jayaraman and Milbourn (2015) Strategic leadership 0.274 Emotions and leadership 0.109
Jiraporn and Lee (2018) Female leadership 0.205 Development of leadership 0.113
Jiraporn, Lee, Park, and Song (2018) Female leadership 0.19 Ethical leadership 0.128
Kahn, Li, and Zhao (2015) Cognition and leadership 0.157 Female leadership 0.141
Laustsen and Petersen (2017) Development of leadership 0.15 Cognition and leadership 0.128
Matsa and Miller (2013) Female leadership 0.224 Strategic leadership 0.177
Poulos (2019) Female leadership 0.169 Ethical leadership 0.126
Rickman and Witt (2008) Transformational leadership 0.128 Strategic leadership 0.122
Shea and Solis (2018) Ethical leadership 0.127 Female leadership 0.12
Siming (2016) Female leadership 0.161 Cognition and leadership 0.158
Tabvuma, Bui, and Homberg (2014) Charismatic leadership 0.138 Female leadership 0.128
Tosun (2016) Strategic leadership 0.238 Ethical leadership 0.118
Valdini (2012) Female leadership 0.271 Transformational leadership 0.115
Vo and Canil (2019) Strategic leadership 0.217 Ethical leadership 0.134
Wyrwich (2015) Transformational leadership 0.165 Cognition and leadership 0.154

Fig. 3. Standard natural experiments — topic characterization. Notes. Panel A pictorially depicts the information reported in Table 2; Panel B: Data points marked
with a star denote natural experiments that are folded in the topic model trained on the 1156 articles published in The Leadership Quarterly; Topic labels: Topic 1 —
‘female leadership’; Topic 2 — ‘emotions and leadership’; Topic 3 — transformational leadership’; Topic 4 — ‘development of leadership’; Topic 5 — ‘(neo-)
charismatic leadership’; Topic 6 — ‘cognition and leadership’; Topic 7 — ‘strategic leadership’; Topic 8 — ‘ethical leadership’; Topic 9 — ‘nature of managerial work’;
Topic 10 — ‘leadership in teams and decision group.’ ‘MDS’ stands for multidimensional scaling; ‘PC1’ and ‘PC2’ refer to the components returned from the MDS
analysis.

J. Sieweke and S. Santoni The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

5



The third study, by Shea and Solis (2018), analyzes the relationship
between leader tenure and countries' creditworthiness. The authors
argue that higher leader tenure will reduce uncertainty in the sovereign
credit market and will therefore increase a country's creditworthiness.
Since leader tenure is endogenous (e.g., effective leaders tend to have a
higher tenure), the authors backup their panel data analysis with a
natural experiment in which leader tenure is exogenously determined.
They focused on countries characterized by attempts to assassinate the
political leader. While such events are not random, as confirmed by the
authors' balance tests (see also the discussion in Jones & Olken, 2005),
the outcome is as-if random. The authors provide anecdotal evidence
for this claim (e.g., the successful assassination of President Kennedy
versus the unsuccessful assassination of President Reagan) and ex-
cluded all assassinations in which the success was not determined by
chance (e.g., en coup d’etat). Shea and Solis (2018) used a two-step
approach in their analysis. First, they regressed sovereign bond yields
on leader tenure, assassination success, and an interaction term. The
interaction term was positive and significant, which indicated that as-
sassination success had a stronger effect on bond yields at higher levels
of leader tenure. Second, the authors accounted for a potential selection
in the assassination sample (i.e., assassination attempts are likelier in
poorer, non-democratic states) by applying the Heckman selection
model, which supported the findings from the OLS. Overall, the study
used an unusual exogenous variation of leader tenure to provide robust
evidence that leader tenure influences a country's creditworthiness.

To sum up, the three examples of standard natural experiments
explore important leadership topics (e.g., consequences of a leader's
tenure and female leadership) and provide robust causal inference. The
three studies use very different exogenous variations, such as laws or
even assassination attempts, and focus on leadership in the contexts of
villages, firms, and states. Thus, the three examples highlight both the
potential and the variability of standard natural experiments for lea-
dership research.

Instrumental variable designs

Instrumental variable (IV) designs have already received some at-
tention in management research, as several researchers recommend
their use to correct for endogeneity in the relationship between an in-
dependent variable and a dependent variable (e.g., Bascle, 2008;
Semadeni, Withers, & Certo, 2014). The basic idea of the IV design is
shown in Fig. 4: The treatment variable D is influenced by covariates A,
B, and F. Because at least one of the covariates is unobserved, we cannot

directly estimate the causal effect of the treatment D on the outcome Y.
The IV design ‘solves' the endogeneity problem, which results from the
omitted variable bias, by leveraging an instrument C to which subjects
are (as-if) randomly assigned (Dunning, 2012).

A valid instrument needs to fulfill three conditions (Angrist &
Pischke, 2009). First, it needs to be exogenous, which means that it is
uncorrelated with other causes of the dependent variable except for the
treatment. Second, the instrument needs to influence the assignment of
the treatment (i.e., it influences the probability of receiving the treat-
ment). Third, the instrument has no relationship with the dependent
variable except through the treatment. A violation of the conditions can
lead to a severe bias in the estimates (Bound, Jaeger, & Baker, 1995;
Semadeni et al., 2014). It is therefore important that researchers thor-
oughly scrutinize any candidate instrument and check whether and to
what extent it fulfills these three conditions.

Instrumental variable designs and leadership research
Table 3 reports the set of studies that draw upon the IV design. Our

topic model – whose insights are summarized in Fig. 5, Panel A – re-
veals that ‘female leadership’ (Topic 1) and ‘strategic leadership’ (Topic
7) tend to dominate the focus of attention of this group of studies. In
fact, the core topics are even more core in this case than in standard
natural experiments, whereas the number of documents that build on
the remaining topics is relatively small. Panel B, showing the posi-
tioning of IV designs in terms of the articles published in The Leadership
Quarterly, confirms that the data-points are concentrated in the bottom
right of the chart.

Instrumental variable design examples
Our review shows that several studies in leadership research have

applied the IV design, but only to address very few topics. In this sec-
tion, we will focus on three example studies and explain their approach
in more detail in order to provide leadership scholars with insights into
how the IV design can be applied.

The first study was conducted by Bennedsen et al. (2007). It ana-
lyzed the relationship between CEO succession decisions, particularly
the decision of family firms to hire a family or an external CEO, and
firm performance. Testing the causal effect of CEO succession decisions
on firm performance is difficult, because family members have in-depth
knowledge regarding the characteristics of other family members (e.g.,
human capital), which will probably affect their decision to hire an
external candidate. To infer a causal relationship, the authors use the
gender of the departing family CEO's firstborn child as an instrument.
They provide evidence that (i) the instrument is exogenous, because
gender is randomly assigned; (ii) the instrument is relevant, because in
the case of a family transition, it is about 10% higher when the firstborn
child is male; and (iii) the instrument is unlikely to affect firm perfor-
mance through other channels than CEO succession decisions, because
a first child's gender is not related to firm-level attributes (e.g., age, size,
and profitability). The authors conducted supplemental statistical
analyses (e.g., using CEO deaths as an alternative instrument; ruling out
changes in governance structure as alternative explanations) to back up
their finding that appointing a family CEO leads to a decline of ca. 4%
in firm profitability. Overall, the study adopts a creative instrument to
estimate the causal impact of hiring professional managers on firm-
level outcomes.

In the second study, Yang et al. (2019) investigated the relationships
between students' centrality within a social network, gender, and at-
tainment of leadership positions. The authors apply a two-study design
in which they first test their hypotheses based on observational data,
then infer the causal relationship by means of an IV design. The cor-
relational study shows that a student's ego-network is related to her or
his job placement in leadership positions. Network centrality is posi-
tively related to job placement both for male and female students —
however, female students especially benefit from more women-domi-
nated networks and from relatively even communication with peers.

Fig. 4. Visual representation of the instrumental variable framework. Notes.
Continuous, oriented arrows denote the causal effect linking two variables;
Dashed edges denote the presence of a common cause between two variables; C
is an instrumental variable for D; A, B, and F are observables that influence D; G
is a variable that affects the outcome but it is not causally related to D, so it does
not affect the presumed causal path linking D to Y.
Source: Morgan and Winship (2015, page 30).

J. Sieweke and S. Santoni The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

6



Table 3
Instrumental variables designs — substantive focus.

Salient topics

1st topic 2nd topic

Study Topic label Prob. Topic label Prob.

Adams, Almeida, and Ferreira (2009) Strategic leadership 0.214 Female leadership 0.113
Adhikari (2018) Female leadership 0.177 Strategic leadership 0.134
Adkins, Carter, and Simpson (2007) Strategic leadership 0.162 Female leadership 0.134
Aghion, Van Reenen, and Zingales (2013) Strategic leadership 0.151 Female leadership 0.148
Akyol and Cohen (2013) Female leadership 0.186 Strategic leadership 0.181
Amore, Garofalo, and Minichilli (2014) Female leadership 0.181 Strategic leadership 0.142
Amore, Miller, Le Breton-Miller, and Corbetta (2017) Strategic leadership 0.156 Transformational leadership 0.122
Arora (2018) Female leadership 0.176 Strategic leadership 0.144
Artz, Goodall, and Oswald (2017) Transformational leadership 0.185 Dyadic relations 0.163
Azoulay, Liu, and Stuart (2017) Transformational leadership 0.139 Development of leadership 0.135
Barros and Nunes (2007) Strategic leadership 0.136 Ethical leadership 0.134
Bennedsen, Nielsen, Perez-Gonzalez, and Wolfenzon (2007) Strategic leadership 0.283 Transformational leadership 0.181
Bernile, Bhagwat, and Yonker (2018) Female leadership 0.179 Ethical leadership 0.171
Chen, Leung, and Goergen (2017) Female leadership 0.226 Development of leadership 0.127
Chintrakarn, Jiraporn, Tong, and Chatjuthamard (2017) Cognition and leadership 0.156 Strategic leadership 0.144
Conroy and Weiler (2016) Strategic leadership 0.219 Female leadership 0.14
Conyon and He (2017) Strategic leadership 0.198 Female leadership 0.191
Dal Bó et al. (2009) Female leadership 0.208 Development of leadership 0.179
Dasgupta (2018) Female leadership 0.123 Charismatic leadership 0.119
Delis, Gaganis, Hasan, and Pasiouras (2017) Female leadership 0.239 Strategic leadership 0.139
Driver and Guedes (2017) Strategic leadership 0.155 Development of leadership 0.144
Frantz and Stein (2017) Female leadership 0.151 Strategic leadership 0.138
Gabel and Scheve (2007) Female leadership 0.141 Development of leadership 0.121
Harjoto and Rossi (2019) Female leadership 0.15 Strategic leadership 0.124
Hearn and Filatotchev (2019) Ethical leadership 0.156 Female leadership 0.128
Hooghiemstra, Kuang, and Qin (2017) Female leadership 0.141 Strategic leadership 0.132
Izgi and Akkaş (2012) Strategic leadership 0.203 Female leadership 0.151
Khwaja (2009) Strategic leadership 0.17 Female leadership 0.126
Kılıç and Kuzey (2016) Female leadership 0.232 Strategic leadership 0.174
Li, Gong, Zhang, and Koh (2018) Strategic leadership 0.19 Transformational leadership 0.156
Lin, Lin, Song, and Li (2011) Strategic leadership 0.189 Cognition and leadership 0.183
Markussen and Røed (2017) Female leadership 0.196 Transformational leadership 0.148
Nicolosi and Yore (2015) Strategic leadership 0.203 Female leadership 0.129
Pascal, Mersland, and Mori (2017) Strategic leadership 0.209 Female leadership 0.172
Rouse (2012) Transformational leadership 0.167 Strategic leadership 0.128
Sabatier (2015) Female leadership 0.165 Ethical leadership 0.138
Shue and Townsend (2017) Strategic leadership 0.172 Emotions and leadership 0.167
Sun and Hovey (2013) Strategic leadership 0.273 Female leadership 0.115
Yang, Chawla, and Uzzi (2019) Female leadership 0.186 Emotions and leadership 0.144
Wu (2015) Female leadership 0.175 Ethical leadership 0.124
de Vries (2012) Transformational leadership 0.234 Leadership in teams 0.219

Fig. 5. Instrumental variable designs — topic characterization. Notes. Panel A pictorially depicts the information reported in Table 3; Panel B: Data points marked
with a star denote natural experiments that are folded in the topic model trained on the 1156 articles published in The Leadership Quarterly; Topic labels: Topic 1 —
‘female leadership’; Topic 2 — ‘emotions and leadership’; Topic 3 — ‘transformational leadership’; Topic 4 — ‘development of leadership’; Topic 5 — ‘(neo-)
charismatic leadership’; Topic 6 — ‘cognition and leadership’; Topic 7 — ‘strategic leadership’; Topic 8 — ‘ethical leadership’; Topic 9 — ‘nature of managerial work’;
Topic 10 — ‘leadership in teams and decision groups.’ ‘MDS’ stands for multidimensional scaling; ‘PC1’ and ‘PC2’ refer to the components returned from the MDS
analysis.

J. Sieweke and S. Santoni The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

7



Because the observational study provides no insights into the causal
focal relationship, the authors exploit an exogenous variation in the
context. When students start their MBA programme, they are randomly
assigned to home sections. Students take their first-quarter classes only
with students from their home section, which is why their home-sec-
tion-mates initially represent their most important friends. Later in
their studies, students bid for second-quarter classes. Since the enroll-
ment of students into classes is relatively unpredictable (i.e., many
students even end up in classes they did not bid for), students have
limited influence on the inter-personal ties they will develop. The au-
thors used a student's degree of exposure to same-gender classmates
from other home sections as the instrument. The findings of the IV
design mostly support the correlational study. Female students' job
placements are influenced by having an inner circle, whereas no effect
was found for male students. Overall, the study exploits the as-if
random assignment of students to networks as an instrument to esti-
mate the causal effect of networks on attaining leadership positions,
particularly for female leaders.

Finally, Chintrakarn et al. (2017) investigated the relationship be-
tween managers' religious piety and firms' anti-takeover provisions. For
the instrument, the authors used the degree of religious piety from 1971
in the community surrounding a company's headquarters. First, the
authors regressed the number of anti-takeover defenses on the non-in-
strumented current religious piety variable and found a positive effect.
In the second step, they analyzed the same relationship based on in-
strumented values of current religious piety. The two-stage least
squares analysis supported the conclusion of the correlational analysis
that current religious piety affects corporate governance, although the
coefficient of the instrumented treatment variable was smaller
(b=0.849) than the coefficient of the non-instrumented treatment
variable (b=1.256). As a robustness check, the authors used another
instrumental variable — the degree of religious piety in the population
in 1952. The result of the two-stage least squares supported the prior
findings. Overall, the authors provide evidence that religious piety
substitutes for corporate governance and reduces the conflict between
managers and shareholders.

To sum up, the three examples highlight creative ways of applying
instruments to estimate causal relationships involving a variety of lea-
dership topics — including the consequences of leader selection for
firms (Bennedsen et al., 2007), leadership development (Yang et al.,
2019), and the consequences of culture on strategic leadership
(Chintrakarn et al., 2017).

Regression discontinuity design

The regression discontinuity(RD) design was initially developed by
Thistlethwaite and Campbell (1960). It capitalizes on the fact that in
many settings (e.g., business and education) a unit's score – above or
below a certain threshold on a continuous variable – determines the
treatment status of the unit. The basic idea of the RD design is shown in
Fig. 6. When the assignment variable X is greater than or equal to x*,
which represents the threshold, units receive the treatment; if X is
smaller than x*, units receive no treatment. The RD design builds on the
assumption that in the neighborhood of the threshold (x*) the assign-
ment process is almost random (Dunning, 2012; Lee & Lemieux, 2010).
Then, the variance in the outcome variable y across the X< x* and X ≥
x* regimes is caused by the treatment (Antonakis et al., 2010), re-
presented by the quantity δ.

So far, we have assumed that the probability of treatment assign-
ment changes from 0 to 1 when X> x*. This so-called ‘sharp’ RD design
is probably the most common form in empirical research. However,
some studies also apply a ‘fuzzy’ RD design. Here, the change in the
probability of receiving the treatment is much smaller than in the sharp
RD design when X ≥ x* (Lee & Lemieux, 2010). For instance, the
probability of receiving the treatment may just increase by several
percentage points at the threshold (see, e.g., Grönqvist & Lindqvist,

2016). Although the sharp and the fuzzy RD differ to some extent, re-
searchers can use both RD designs to estimate the average causal effect
of the treatment.

Regression Discontinuity Designs and Leadership Research
Table 4 shows the set of leadership studies drawing upon an RD

design. The distribution of leadership topics across the documents (see
Fig. 7, Panel A) confirms causal methods – irrespective the specific
estimation framework – are core to the study of female leadership (in
fact, Topic 1 has the highest number of occurrences among ‘salient
topics'). In addition, the RD design seems to associate to another two
topics, namely ‘nature of managerial work’ (Topic 9) and ‘leadership in
teams and decision groups' (Topic 10).

Regression discontinuity design examples
Our review indicates that to date only a few leadership studies have

used the RD design. We will discuss three studies and analyze their
approach in more detail in order to provide leadership scholars with
insights into applying the RD design for inferring causal relationships.

The first study that we have selected is by Arvate et al. (2018). They
adopted a sharp RD design to analyze the ‘queen bee’ phenomenon
(Staines, Tavris, & Jayaratne, 1974), which states that women in lea-
dership positions do not support – and may even penalize – female
followers. The authors point out that prior studies on the phenomenon
are affected by reverse causality and omitted variable biases, and,
therefore, do not have a causal interpretation. To overcome these
problems, the authors use an RD design focusing on close-run elections
in Brazilian municipalities. Empirical data indicate that those munici-
palities in which women are elected as mayors over a male candidate by
a close margin do not differ from municipalities in which women just
lost the election against a male competitor. Thus, near the threshold
(i.e., 50% of votes), it is almost random as to whether a woman or a
man is assigned to the leadership position. The results do not provide
clear evidence for the queen bee hypothesis. In public organizations,
which are under the influence of mayors, the ratio of female to male
workers is reduced for middle management (anti-women) but increased
for top management (pro-women) in municipalities ruled by female

Fig. 6. Visual representation of the regression discontinuity design. Notes. The
underlying population regression function is y= α+ δD + β(X− x*), where y
is the response variable, α is the intercept, δ denotes the systematic difference in
y across control and treated units, whereas β is the regression slope of the mean
centered X scores.

J. Sieweke and S. Santoni The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

8



mayors. Overall, the study applies a sharp RD design to test the causal
effect of female leaders on the career opportunities of female followers.

The second study is by Heck and Moriyama (2010), who used a
sharp RD design to analyze the indirect relationship between im-
provement-focused school leadership and student learning outcomes
via school instructional practices. The authors exploit the discontinuity
which results from a cut-off date for students for starting kindergarten.
In the study setting, students who were 5 years old by December 31
were assigned to the treatment (i.e., one year further schooling),
whereas students who were 4 years old by December 31 were assigned
to the control group (i.e., one year less schooling). Again, we can argue
that near the cut-off, the student assignment to the treatment and
control groups is as good as random, because parents cannot precisely
manipulate the birth date of their children. Due to students' nesting
within schools, the authors applied a multilevel RD design. The results
provide causal evidence for the benefits of one additional year of
schooling (i.e., the added-year of schooling effect). The authors further
show that the added-year of schooling effect is influenced by the effect
of improvement-focused school leadership on school instructional
practices.

Finally, Grönqvist and Lindqvist (2016) used a fuzzy RD design to
analyze how receiving military officer training influences the prob-
ability of attaining a civil leadership position. Directly testing this re-
lationship is difficult as individuals who receive officer training differ
from individuals who do not receive the training with regard to ob-
servable and unobservable characteristics (e.g., abilities). To infer the

causal effect of the officer training, Grönqvist and Lindqvist (2016) used
discontinuities in test scores as the identification strategy. That is, all
individuals who were drafted in the Swedish military had to complete a
cognitive ability test in which their abilities were ranked according to
four dimensions on a scale from 1 (lowest) to 9 (highest). Although the
test score did not determine whether or not a person received the
training, it significantly increased the probability of being treated. For
instance, receiving the officer training ‘jumps' from only 2% of the re-
cruits with a score of 17 to 28% for recruits with a score of 18
(Grönqvist & Lindqvist, 2016). Because of the fuzzy RD design, the
authors used two-stage least squares to estimate the relationship be-
tween receiving officer training and attaining a civil leadership position
after the military service. Their results indicate that officer training
clearly influences the attainment of a civil leadership position. In-
dividuals who received the officer training have a 75% higher like-
lihood of attaining a civil leadership position compared to the controls.
Overall, the study provides causal evidence for the effectiveness of
general leadership training.

To sum up, the three examples show that both the sharp and the
fuzzy RD designs can provide answers to important questions in lea-
dership research. The studies were conducted in a variety of contexts
(e.g., schools, military, public administration) and used very different
assignment variables (e.g., age, voting margins, test scores). However,
all three studies exploited the almost random assignment of units near
the cut-off point for causal inference.

Table 4
Regression discontinuity designs — substantive focus.

Salient topics

1st topic 2nd topic

Study Topic label Prob. Topic label Prob.

Arvate et al. (2018) Female leadership 0.373 Charismatic leadership 0.129
Boas and Hidalgo (2011) Leadership in teams 0.177 Charismatic leadership 0.16
Butler (2009) Charismatic leadership 0.203 Female leadership 0.127
Dal Bó et al. (2009) Female leadership 0.208 Development of leadership 0.179
Dunning and Nilekani (2013) Leadership in teams 0.15 Female leadership 0.148
Grönqvist and Lindqvist (2016) Transformational leadership 0.14 Leadership in teams 0.123
Heck and Moriyama (2010) Cognition and leadership 0.129 Ethical leadership 0.123
Lechler and McNamee (2018) Leadership in teams 0.16 Female leadership 0.132

Fig. 7. Regression discontinuity designs — topic characterization. Notes. Panel A pictorially depicts the information reported in Table 4; Panel B: Data points marked
with a star denote natural experiments that are folded in the topic model trained on the 1156 articles published in The Leadership Quarterly; Topic labels: Topic 1 —
‘female leadership’; Topic 2 — ‘emotions and leadership’; Topic 3 — ‘transformational leadership’; Topic 4 — ‘development of leadership’; Topic 5 — ‘(neo-)
charismatic leadership’; Topic 6 — ‘cognition and leadership’; Topic 7 — ‘strategic leadership’; Topic 8 — ‘ethical leadership’; Topic 9 — ‘nature of managerial work’;
Topic 10 — ‘leadership in teams and decision group.’ ‘MDS’ stands for multidimensional scaling; ‘PC1’ and ‘PC2’ refer to the components returned from the MDS
analysis.

J. Sieweke and S. Santoni The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

9



Natural experiments in leadership research: guidelines

Our review of studies from various leadership-related disciplines,
including economics, business and management, political sciences, and
social sciences, suggests that natural experiments are very effective in
identifying causal relationships. This section provides some guidelines
on further facilitating the use of natural experiments in leadership re-
search. The key phases of the research design are presented, starting
with the discovery of a natural experiment moving on to the actual form
of the natural experiment, and then finishing with the statistical ana-
lysis.

Discovering natural experiments

A major challenge for leadership scholars is to discover natural
experiments. Unlike laboratory and field experiments, researchers
cannot actually design natural experiments. Instead, they need to dis-
cover contexts in which a random or as-if random variation has taken
place. Discovering these contexts is difficult. For instance, Dunning
(2012, p. 41) argues that discovering natural experiments is ‘as much
art as science.’

We believe a good way to discover natural experiments is by
learning from prior examples. Firstly, novel research questions can
often be answered by re-using a known/established natural experiment.
For example, the natural experiment of the German reunification has
been exploited to analyze several research questions, such as the impact
of income on health (e.g., Frijters, Haisken-DeNew, & Shields, 2005),
the transmission of preferences for entrepreneurship from parents to
children (e.g., Wyrwich, 2015), or the legitimation of inequality (e.g.,
Haack & Sieweke, 2018). Secondly, even when known/established ex-
periments may not be perfect for addressing a new research question,
by analogical reasoning, researchers can be inspired by such experi-
ments and discover more appropriate naturally-occurring events for
their research question.

Tables 5, 6, and 7 summarize the research questions, exogenous
variations, and treatments of each individual study included in our
review. Regarding standard natural experiments (see Table 5), many
studies have exploited the introduction of new laws or regulations, such
as a legal reform in Sweden that discontinued the conferral of state
orders of merit (Siming, 2016), or new anti-takeover legislation (Cheng
et al., 2005). Others have used laws that set certain quotas, such as the
proportion of women on the boards of Norwegian firms (Matsa &
Miller, 2013), or that reserved leadership positions for members of
minorities in randomly selected villages (Beaman et al., 2012). Finally,
some studies leverage sudden, exogenous events, such as earthquakes
(Belloc et al., 2016), the successful assassination of political leaders
(Shea & Solis, 2018), or the division of Germany into two states after
1945 (Wyrwich, 2015).

Instrumental variables (see Table 6) can be categorized into four
main groups: i) macro-level variables pertaining to cultural, institu-
tional, or societal properties, such as the degree of religious piety within
a population (Chintrakarn et al., 2017) or the ratio of voters in favor of
divorce within a region (Amore et al., 2017); ii) random or as-if random
events, such as the gender of a CEO's first born child (Bennedsen et al.,
2007) or the proportion of a firm's founders that are dead (Adams et al.,
2009); iii) spatial distance or related variables, e.g., the distance of
companies from executive recruiting firms (Akyol & Cohen, 2013) or
the existence and intensity of one-stop flight connections between the
locations of potential director home addresses and firm headquarters
(Bernile et al., 2018); and finally iv) personal or team attributes, such as
CEO age and tenure (Driver & Guedes, 2017) or board size (Kılıç &
Kuzey, 2016).

Concerning the RD design (see Table 7), the highest number of
studies focus on the margin of victory in an election as an assignment
variable (e.g., Arvate et al., 2018; Boas & Hidalgo, 2011). These studies
exploit the fact that in close elections, the assignment of individuals to

the leader position is almost random.
Ultimately, scholars have discovered natural experiments in a

variety of leadership-related contexts and we recommend leadership
scholars to analyze whether their research questions can be analyzed
using the same natural experiment. Furthermore, leadership scholars
may focus on current or historical institutional changes (e.g., the in-
troduction of new laws) or try to identify contexts in which assignment
to training, jobs, or ranks are based on or influenced by a unit's score on
an observed variable to identify a new natural experimental context.

Deciding about the form of the natural experiment

Once an exogenous, naturally-occurring variation has been dis-
covered, scholars need to decide the form of natural experiment to
adopt. This choice is key to a design's internal validity as standard
natural experiments, IV, and RD designs build on specific assumptions
about the mechanisms that are presumed to generate the observed data
(Dunning, 2012; Imbens & Wooldridge, 2009). Our decision tree
(Fig. 8) is designed to help scholars select the most suitable research
design.

The first question leadership scholars need to answer concerns the
assignment process: is the assignment of units to the treatment truly
random, ‘as-if random’ (i.e., the assignment process resembles a true
randomization, Dunning, 2012), or non-random? Although a true ran-
domization is a hallmark of laboratory and field experiments (Podsakoff
& Podsakoff, 2019), it is seldom found in natural experiments — except
for studies that use lotteries (e.g., Angrist, 1990).

In fact, most natural experiments are characterized by an as-if
random assignment. The as-if random assignment poses some chal-
lenges for leadership scholars, because they need to evaluate the quality
of the as-if randomization; that is, the extent to which it is plausible to
assume that the assignment process (closely) resembles a true rando-
mization. Dunning (2012) recommends assessing the quality of the as-if
randomization based on three criteria. First, researchers should in-
vestigate whether units had information that they would or would not
receive the treatment. Second, researchers need to check whether units
had incentives to self-select into the treatment group or control group.
Third, researchers should analyze whether not only units had incentives
but also capacity to self-select into a treatment status. For the assess-
ment, Dunning (2012) suggests using both qualitative evidence (e.g.,
documents, interviews) and quantitative evidence (e.g., balance tests).

Jones and Olken (2005), for example, jointly used qualitative and
quantitative evidence to evaluate the plausibility of as-if randomiza-
tion. They used qualitative evidence, such as leaders' biographies, to
determine whether the nature of death of political leaders was truly
exogenous (e.g., due to health issues or accidents). At the same time,
they provide quantitative evidence, such as the result of a logistic re-
gression, to back up the assumption that economic conditions do not
predict the death of political leaders.

If the assignment process is random or as-if random, then re-
searchers need to check the second question: are units allowed to
change their treatment status, moving from the treatment (control) to
the control (treatment) group? This check is important, because units
that comply with the assignment (‘compliers') probably differ from
units that do not comply with the assignment (‘non-compliers'). For
instance, in Angrist’s (1990) study on the effect of military service on
lifetime earnings, subjects were assigned to the treatment (military
service) and control group (no military service) based on their date of
birth and the result of a draft lottery. However, some subjects who were
eligible based on the result of the lottery did not serve in the military,
because they went to college or moved outside the U.S. We can assume
that these non-compliers differ from the compliers (i.e., those citizens
who were eligible and did serve and those who were not eligible and
did not serve in the military) regarding knowledge, values, attitudes
etc., and that these differences are probably correlated with their life-
time earnings. Therefore, leadership scholars should, if possible, focus

J. Sieweke and S. Santoni The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

10



Table 5
Standard natural experiments — research questions, exogenous variations, and treatments.

Authors Research question Context Exogenous variation Treatment

Bae and Yi (2008) Do mutual fund managers time the market? Equity mutual funds Introduction of the “short-short rule” for mutual funds The short-short rule hinders mutual fund managers
from timing the market

Bækgaard (2011) Whether and how two different organizational leadership
models affect the interaction between politicians and
administrators

Danish municipalities Amalgamation of 232 municipalities into 65 new municipalities Decision to use different administrative leadership
models

Beaman et al. (2012) Does growing up under female leadership raises aspirations and
educational attainment for girls?

Indian Villages Law that reserves the chief councilor position for women in a
random sample of villages

Female leader

Belloc et al. (2016) Do natural catastrophes impact the stability of institutional
regimes?

Medieval Italian cities Earthquakes Earthquakes interpreted as manifestation of God's
outrage

Bhavnani (2017) Do the effects of temporary ethnic group quotas persist? Indian Villages Quasi-random declaration of reserved seats to be “open” in
elections in 1974 and 2008

Discontinuation of ethnic group quotas

Breda and Ly (2015) Does the level of male-domination influence gender bias? French higher
education

Examiners in oral examinations are aware of the candidate's
gender, whereas examiners are unaware of the gender in
written exams

Proportion of women among professors within a
scientific field

Brockman et al. (2015) Does CEO compensation risk influences managers' risk-seeking
behavior?

U.S. public
corporations

Passage of FAS 123R Reduction in CEO compensation risk level

Byrd et al. (2012) Which governance mechanisms are associated with firm
survival and failure?

U.S. firms Thrift crisis of the late 1980s Unitary leadership (single CEO/Chairman) vs. dual
leadership (two leaders)

Chauchard (2014) Can descriptive representation for a stigmatized group change
the beliefs and intentions of members of dominant groups?

Indian villages Discontinuity in the implementation of reservation of political
leadership positions for minorities

Members of stigmatized groups hold political
leadership positions

Chen et al. (2016) Do controlling shareholders hold CEOs accountable to
corporate fraud behavior?

Chinese companies Split Share Structure Reform in China Greater incentive for powerful shareholders to
monitor managers

Cheng et al. (2005) What value do managers place on the control rights conferred
by stock ownership?

U.S. companies Introduction of second-generation anti-takeover legislation Weakening of outsiders' takeover power

Cohen and Wang (2013) Do staggered boards negatively affect firm value? Firms in Delaware Unexpected court rulings in Delaware that affected for a subset
of firms the extent to which staggered boards can impede
shareholders seeking to replace a majority of directors

Weakening of the anti-takeover force of staggered
boards

Coman (2018) How does the party affiliation of local elites influence the
distribution of central government funds to territorial units?

Romania 2008 Romanian electoral reform Change from a closed-list proportional system to a
system that requires all members of the parliament to
run in single-member districts

Cox et al. (2000) Does politicians' career goals influence their decision to join a
faction?

Japanese bicameral
parliament

Different electoral rules in the two houses of the Japanese
parliament

Lower level of electoral competition when politicians'
join a faction

Cuñat and Guadalupe
(2009)

Do deregulation and increased product market competition
influence the compensation packages that firms offer to their
executives?

U.S. financial sector Deregulation laws that reduced entry barriers into the financial
sector

Increased product market competition

Dahya and McConnell
(2005)

Do boards with significant outside directors make different
decisions than boards dominated by inside directors?

U.K. firms Publication of the “Cadbury Report” which coerced firms into
adding outside directors

Appointment of outside directors

de Paola and Scoppa
(2015)

Is gender discrimination affected by the gender of evaluators? Italian universities Random assignment of evaluators Degree of committee gender composition

de Paola et al. (2010) Do gender quotas influence women involvement in political
activity?

Italian local
administration

Some municipalities did not vote under the gender quota
regime

Gender quotas

Gittell et al. (2008) Does job design affect the coordination of work? Massachusetts hospital Some patients were assigned to hospitalist physicians while
others remained under the care of their own private practice
physicians

Stage- and site-based specialization

Gormley et al. (2012) How do boards adjust incentives in response to firms' risk and
how do these incentives affect managers' risk-taking?

U.S. listed corporations Workers being exposed to chemicals that have just been found
to be toxic

Increase in left-tail risk (i.e., material risk)

Guadalupe and Wulf
(2010)

Does product market competition influence organizational
design?

large U.S. firms Canada-United States Free Trade Agreement of 1989 Increase in competition

Han and Zhang (2018) What is the net effect of a politically connected board for firms? Chinese companies Regulatory change in China Bureaucrats were forbidden from sitting on the board
of public firms

Hidalgo et al. (2016) Does auditor appointment affect political accountability? Brazilian state audit
courts

Variation in the appointment mechanisms for choosing auditors Auditors insulated from political influence

(continued on next page)

J.
Siew

eke
and

S.
Santoni

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101338

11



Table 5 (continued)

Authors Research question Context Exogenous variation Treatment

Huber and Arceneaux
(2007)

Do presidential campaign advertisements mobilize, inform, or
persuade citizens?

U.S. presidential
elections

Some individuals living in non-battleground states accidentally
received different advertisement because they resided in a
media market adjoining a competitive state.

High levels or one-sided barrages of campaign
advertisements

Jayaraman and
Milbourn (2015)

Do CEO equity incentives influence financial misreporting? U.S. public
corporations

Collapse of Arthur Andersen Level of auditor expertise

Jiraporn and Lee (2018) How do co-opted directors affect dividend policy? U.S. public
corporations

Passage of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act Increase in board independence

Jiraporn et al. (2018) Do independent directors influence corporate innovation? U.S. public
corporations

Passage of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act Increase in board independence

Kahn et al. (2015) Do shifts in evaluating local officials for promotion affect their
efforts to reduce water pollution?

Chinese municipalities Change in the local political promotion criteria Higher incentives for local political leaders to reduce
border pollution

Knott (2001) Does hierarchy provide a dynamic advantage? Quick-printing
industry

Establishments leave a franchise system Establishments lose their hierarchical manager

Having self-employed parents who encountered a great deal of
resistance due to their self-employment

Laustsen and Petersen
(2017)

Are political candidates and leaders with dominant, masculine
physical features more preferred under conditions of conflict
than of cooperation?

Poland and Ukraine Crimea crisis in 2014 Condition of conflict

Matsa and Miller (2013) Does female leadership affect corporate decision making? Norwegian listed firms Law that sets a quota for women in the board of directors Increase of female leaders
Poulos (2019) Does personal wealth cause individuals to select into public

office?
Georgia 1805 and 1807 Georgia land lotteries Increase in wealth due to lottery

Rickman and Witt
(2008)

Do principals who exercise favouritism towards certain agents
harm other agents?

English soccer Introduction of professional referees to the English Premier
League

A group of referees was retained for the whole soccer
season on a full salary

Shea and Solis (2018) Does leader tenure influence country's creditworthiness? Cross-country analysis Successful executive assassination Leader death
Siming (2016) Do orders of merit function as an external form of perquisite

through which the government can supplement the
compensation given by a publicly listed firm to the CEO?

Swedish companies 1974 legal reform in Sweden Discontinuing the conferral of orders of merit to
citizens

Tabvuma et al. (2014) Does change in political leadership influence job satisfaction in
the public sector?

British public sector Change in the political party which is governing at the national
level

The ruling political party matches the political
preference of the public sector employee

Tosun (2016) Do CEO option compensation changes influence firm leverage
changes?

U.S. public
corporations

Internal Revenue Code 162(m) tax law Increased option compensation for CEOs

Valdini (2012) Do electoral systems affect candidate selection, especially
female political leaders?

Elections in Japan Electoral reforms of the Japanese House of Representatives in
1994

Move towards a greater orientation towards issues
and parties

Vo and Canil (2019) Is CEO pay disparity due to efficient contracting or CEO power? U.S. public
corporations

Introduction of FASB ASC 718 in 2005 All accounting benefits associated with option grants
were removed

Wyrwich (2015) Do parents transmit preferences for entrepreneurship to their
children?

Entrepreneurs in
Germany

German divide in 1945 which leads to some parents of
entrepreneurs growing up in a socialist country

Having self-employed parents who encountered a
great deal of resistance due to their self-employment

J.
Siew

eke
and

S.
Santoni

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101338

12



Table 6
Instrumental variable designs—research questions, exogenous variations, and treatments.

Authors Research question Context Exogenous variation Treatment

Adams et al. (2009) Do founder-CEOs influence firm performance? Family firms (1) proportion of the firm's founders that are dead; (2) number of people
who founded the company

Founder-CEO

Adhikari (2018) Do firms led by female top executives hold more cash? U.S. listed companies Fraction of registered men between the ages of 18 and 44 who were
drafted or enlisted for WWII in a state

Number of female executives

Adkins et al. (2007) Do managerial compensation and ownership influence
the use of foreign-exchange derivatives by U.S. bank
holding companies

Large bank holding companies (1) number of employees, (2) number of subsidiaries; (3) number of
offices; (4) CEO age; (5) 12month maturity mismatch; (6) market-to-
book ratio; (7) foreign interest income dummy

Managerial compensation and
ownership

Aghion et al. (2013) Does institutional ownership influence firm innovation? S&P 500 firms Firms' addition to the S&P 500 index Institutional ownership
Akyol and Cohen (2013) Does the use of executive search firms for board

member search influence corporate governance?
U.S. public corporations Geographic distance of companies to executive search firms Use of executive search firms

Amore et al. (2017) Does leadership by couples affect the profitability of
family firms?

Italian family firms Regional ratio of voters in favor of divorce Leadership by couples

Amore et al. (2014) Do gender interactions at the top of the corporate
hierarchy affect firm performance?

Italian family firms (1) gender composition of the pool of potential family heirs; (2)
geographic variations in gender stereotypes

Gender interactions

Arora (2018) Does the effort of financially linked independent
directors enable firms to reemerge from bankruptcy?

U.S. firms (1) Board meeting fees; (2) prime interest rate movement; (3) board size Effort of financially linked independent
directors

Artz et al. (2017) Does the competence of supervisors influence the
quality of employees' lives?

U.S. and U.K. employees (1) whether the supervisor has a college degree; (2) whether the
supervisor worked his or her way up in the organization

Supervisor competence

Azoulay et al. (2017) Do young scientists adopt their advisers' orientations
towards commercial science?

Academics from the U.S. (1) proximity between scholars' undergraduate institutions and the
universities where they might become postdoctoral fellows; (2) shared
nationality between the scholar and a potential mentor

Social matching

Barros and Nunes (2007) Which factors influence pay and performance of CEOs? Portuguese non-profit
organizations

(1) number of stockholders in the company; (2) father's education Board composition

Bennedsen et al. (2007) Does the appointment of family CEOs negatively affect
firm performance?

Danish family firms Gender of CEO's first born child Hiring of an external CEO

Bernile et al. (2018) Does board diversity influence corporate policies and
risk?

North American listed companies Existence and intensity of one-stop flight connections between the
locations of potential director home addresses and firm headquarters

Board diversity

Chen et al. (2017) Does gender diversity in boardrooms influence
dividend payouts?

S&P 1500 (1) fraction of male directors linked to female directors; (2) female to
male labor force participation ratio

Board gender diversity

Chintrakarn et al. (2017) Does religious piety substitute for corporate
governance?

U.S. firms degree of religious piety in the past in the population surrounding a
corporate headquarter

Current religious piety in the population
surrounding a corporate headquarter

Conroy and Weiler
(2016)

Does female ownership influence firm performance? U.S. startups (1) change in divorce rate; (2) growth in female labor force
participation

Female owner

Conyon and He (2017) Does gender diversity in boardrooms influence firm
performance?

U.S. firms Percentage of female residents in the U.S. state where the given
company has its headquarter

Board gender diversity

Dal Bó et al. (2009) Why do political dynasties persist? U.S. congress Successful first reelection attempt Long tenure in power
Dasgupta (2018) Does technological change contribute to political

turnover?
Indian agriculture Share of district land with a naturally occurring aquifer interacted with

a dummy variable that “switches on”’ for all districts with the
introduction of HYV crops

Technological change

Delis et al. (2017) Do board members from countries with different
genetic diversity levels influence corporate
performance?

North American and U.K. listed
companies

(1) migratory distance from East Africa; (2) the level of ultraviolet
exposure in the directors' country of nationality

Genetic diversity within a country

(Driver & Guedes, 2017) Is R&D expenditure reduced in cases of imminent
departure of the CEO?

U.K. service and manufacturing
firms

(1) CEO age; (2) CEO tenure; (3) profit shock CEO departure

Frantz and Stein (2017) Do institutionalized leadership succession rules
influence the likelihood that dictators confront coups?

Dictatorships A regime took power at independence Institutionalized leadership succession
rules

Gabel and Scheve (2007) To what extent does elite opinion about policy shape
public opinion?

European countries Change in electoral laws Elite polarization

Harjoto and Rossi (2019) Do religiosity and female representation on the board
influence corporate social responsibility?

Italian listed companies (1) number of words in the encyclicals and other writings that are
related to “religiosity”; (2) number of words in the encyclicals that are
related to gender diversity

Religiosity in the population and women
on the board of directors

Hearn and Filatotchev
(2019)

Does private equity ownership influence the probability
of the founder's retention as CEO?

IPOs in emerging markets Numbers of private equity investors Private equity ownership

(continued on next page)

J.
Siew

eke
and

S.
Santoni

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101338

13



Table 6 (continued)

Authors Research question Context Exogenous variation Treatment

Hooghiemstra et al.
(2017)

Does ‘readability’ of a remuneration report influence
the level of shareholder say-on-pay voting?

U.K.-listed firms Readability of CEO letter Readability of remuneration report

Izgi and Akkaş (2012) Does top management gender diversity influence firm
performance?

Turkish firms (1) CEO MBA; (2) Big 4 Audit Female CEO

Khwaja (2009) Can project design compensate for community-specific
constraints in social capital?

Community-maintained
infrastructure projects in Northern
Pakistan

Characteristics of hereditary leader households (e.g., does the leader
household has a young and healthy male member?)

Having a project leader

Kılıç and Kuzey (2016) Does gender diversity in boardrooms improve firms'
economic performance?

Turkish listed companies (1) board size; (2) board independence; (3) firm size; (4) leverage Board gender diversity

Li et al. (2018) Does superior environmental, social and corporate
governance disclosure affect firm value?

FTSE 350 firms Firm-level initial value of the ESG disclosure score Environmental, social and corporate
governance disclosure

Lin et al. (2011) Do managerial incentives and CEO characteristics
influence a firm's innovation activities?

Chinese manufacturing firms Industry-location averages Provision of managerial incentive
schemes

Markussen and Røed
(2017)

Do gendered peer influences affect early career
entrepreneurship?

Norwegian entrepreneurs Entrepreneurship activity among the schoolmates' parents Peer influences

Nicolosi and Yore (2015) Does a CEO's marital status influence their firm's
investment and compensation policies

S&P 1500 Religious CEO CEO marital status

Pascal et al. (2017) Does a CEO's business education influence the financial
and social performance of microfinance institutions?

Global microfinance institutions Microfinance institution age CEO business education

Rouse (2012) Does high school leadership affect subsequent
educational attainment?

U.S. high schools (1) school-level measure of leadership opportunities; (2) oldest child in
the family

High school leadership

Sabatier (2015) Does gender diversity in boardrooms improve firms'
economic performance?

French publicly listed companies Average ratio of women in connected boardrooms Board gender diversity

Shue and Townsend
(2017)

Does an increase in stock option grants affect CEO risk-
taking?

North American listed companies (1) whether each CEO-year is predicted to be the first year of a new
fixed-value cycle; (2) variation in the value of options granted within
fixed-number and fixed-value cycles

Increase in stock option grants

Sun and Hovey (2013) Does executive compensation influence management
discretionary behavior over financial reporting?

Australian Securities Exchange
(ASX) listed companies

Median value of discretionary accruals for a portfolio of firms Executive compensation

de Vries (2012) Does personality influence leadership styles? Large municipality organization Different-source personality ratings Leader personality
Wu (2015) Does inequality influence trade openness in

authoritarian regimes?
Authoritarian regimes Ratio between two age groups Income inequality

Yang et al. (2019) Do networks influence persons' placement into
leadership positions of varying levels of authority

MBA programme degree of expose to same-gender classmates from other home sections Composition of students' inner circle

J.
Siew

eke
and

S.
Santoni

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101338

14



on the compliers in their analysis (Dunning, 2012) or should try to
estimate the ratio of compliers within a population (see, e.g., Angrist,
1990).

If researchers answer the first question positively (i.e., random or as-
if random assignment) while negatively answering the second one (i.e.,
change of treatment status), then the natural experiment at hand re-
presents a standard natural experiment, whose data can be analyzed
either using Neyman's potential outcome framework or by adopting
model-based adjustments (we discuss the analysis in more detail
below). If both answers are positive, then the natural experiment is an
IV design.

If the assignment to the treatment is neither random nor as-if
random, then leadership researchers need to check whether a unit's
score on an observed variable influences the assignment. An assignment
based on a unit's score on a covariate is a hallmark of the RD design.
The assignment may take two forms (Lee & Lemieux, 2010). First, in the
sharp RD design, a unit's score on a covariate determines the assignment.
For instance, in the study by Arvate et al. (2018), the assignment of
women to political leadership positions was determined by their share
of votes in mayoral elections. Second, in the fuzzy RD design, a unit's
score on a covariate affects the probability of receiving the treatment.
For instance, in Grönqvist and Lindqvist’s (2016) study, a person's score
on a cognitive test influenced the probability of receiving leadership
training.

Finally, if the assignment to the treatment is not based on a unit's
score on an observed variable, then leadership researchers need to
determine whether they exploit an exogenous source of variation that
they can use to approximate an as-if random treatment. If they answer ‘
yes' to the questions, then this exogenous source of variation represents
an instrument and the natural experiment can be classified as an IV
design. For instance, in the study by Bennedsen et al. (2007), the hiring
of a family CEO versus an external CEO is neither random nor as-if
random. However, the authors use an exogenous source of variation —
the gender of the firstborn child as an instrument to estimate the causal
effect of hiring professional managers on firm performance. If re-
searchers cannot exploit such an exogenous source of variation, then
their context represents a correlational design, which does not support
causal inference.

Analyzing natural experiments

After leadership scholars have determined the form of the natural
experiment, they need to analyze the experiment. Although the dif-
ferent forms may require different types of data analysis, simplicity and
transparency are the underlying factors (Dunning, 2012). Simplicity
means that leadership scholars do not necessarily need to apply com-
plex statistical techniques to analyze natural experiment data. A simple
difference-of-means or difference-of-proportions test is often sufficient
to estimate the average causal effect of the treatment. Simplicity in data
analysis also generally implies greater transparency. For instance, dif-
ference-of-means or difference-of-percentages tests provide a more
transparent estimate of the average causal effect than multivariate re-
gression models that contain several covariates. Although researchers
cannot always follow these principles due to the specific circumstances
of a natural experiment and they need to use model-based adjustments,
such as including covariates or adjusting standard errors, we believe
that they should consider the general principles and prefer ‘simpler’
models over more complex ones.

Analyzing standard natural experiments
Estimation of the average causal effect in the standard natural
experiment. The analysis of standard natural experiments is
reasonably simple. Since the assignment of units to the treatment is
random or as-if random, it is possible to infer a causal effect within

T
ab

le
7

R
eg
re
ss
io
n
di
sc
on

ti
nu

it
y
de

si
gn

s
—

re
se
ar
ch

qu
es
ti
on

s,
ex
og

en
ou

s
va
ri
at
io
ns
,
an

d
tr
ea
tm

en
ts
.

A
ut
ho

rs
R
es
ea
rc
h
qu

es
ti
on

C
on

te
xt

Ex
og

en
ou

s
va
ri
at
io
n

Tr
ea
tm

en
t

A
rv
at
e
et

al
.
(2
01

8)
D
o
fe
m
al
e
le
ad

er
s
ha

rm
th
e
ca
re
er

of
fe
m
al
e
fo
llo

w
er
s?

M
ay
or
al

el
ec
ti
on

s
in

B
ra
zi
l

M
ar
gi
n
of

vi
ct
or
y
in

el
ec
ti
on

Fe
m
al
e
le
ad

er

B
oa

s
an

d
H
id
al
go

(2
01

1)
D
oe
s
in
cu
m
be
nc
y
in
fl
ue

nc
e
po

lit
ic
ia
ns
'a
bi
lit
y
to

co
nt
ro
l
th
e
m
ed

ia
an

d
do

es
m
ed

ia
co
nt
ro
l
aff

ec
t
th
ei
r
fu
tu
re

el
ec
to
ra
l
pr
os
pe
ct
s?

El
ec
ti
on

s
in

B
ra
zi
l

M
ar
gi
n
of

vi
ct
or
y
in

el
ec
ti
on

In
cu
m
be
nc
y

B
ut
le
r
(2
00

9)
D
oe
s
th
e
in
cu
m
be
nc
y
ad

va
nt
ag
e
en

jo
ye
d
by

fr
es
hm

en
di
ff
er

fr
om

th
e

in
cu
m
be
nc
y
ad

va
nt
ag
e
en

jo
ye
d
by

no
n-
fr
es
hm

en
in
cu
m
be
nt
s?

U
.S
.
ho

us
e
el
ec
ti
on

s
M
ar
gi
n
of

vi
ct
or
y
in

pr
ev
io
us

el
ec
ti
on

In
cu
m
be
nc
y

D
al

B
ó
et

al
.
(2
00

9)
W
hy

do
po

lit
ic
al

dy
na

st
ie
s
pe
rs
is
t?

U
.S
.
co
ng

re
ss

el
ec
ti
on

s
M
ar
gi
n
of

vi
ct
or
y
in

el
ec
ti
on

Lo
ng

te
nu

re
in

po
w
er

D
un

ni
ng

an
d
N
ile

ka
ni

(2
01

3)
D
o
et
hn

ic
qu

ot
as

in
du

ce
di
st
ri
bu

ti
on

of
m
at
er
ia
l
be
ne

fi
ts

to
m
em

be
rs

of
di
sa
dv

an
ta
ge
d
gr
ou

ps
?

El
ec
ti
on

s
in

In
di
a

Pr
op

or
ti
on

of
th
e
lo
ca
l
po

pu
la
ti
on

co
m
pr
is
ed

of
m
ar
gi
na

liz
ed

ca
st
es

or
tr
ib
es

R
es
er
ve
d
se
at
s
in

th
e
co
un

ci
l
fo
r

m
em

be
rs

of
m
in
or
it
ie
s

G
rö
nq

vi
st

an
d
Li
nd

qv
is
t
(2
01

6)
D
oe
s
tr
ai
ni
ng

du
ri
ng

th
e
Sw

ed
is
h
m
ili
ta
ry

se
rv
ic
e
in
fl
ue

nc
e
th
e
pr
ob

ab
ili
ty

of
at
ta
in
in
g
a
ci
vi
l
le
ad

er
sh
ip

po
si
ti
on

?
Sw

ed
is
h
ar
m
y

Sc
or
e
on

a
co
gn

it
iv
e
ab

ili
ty

te
st

R
ec
ei
ve
d
m
ili
ta
ry

offi
ce
r
tr
ai
ni
ng

H
ec
k
an

d
M
or
iy
am

a
(2
01

0)
D
oe
s
sc
ho

ol
le
ad

er
sh
ip

in
fl
ue

nc
e
st
ud

en
ts
'e
du

ca
ti
on

al
pe
rf
or
m
an

ce
?

Sc
ho

ol
St
ud

en
t
ag
e

A
dd

it
io
na

l
ye
ar

of
sc
ho

ol
in
g

Le
ch
le
r
an

d
M
cN

am
ee

(2
01

8)
D
oe
s
co
lo
ni
al

ru
le

in
fl
ue

nc
e
su
pp

or
t
fo
r
de

m
oc
ra
cy
?

N
am

ib
ia

Lo
ca
ti
on

of
th
e
Po

lic
e
Zo

ne
bo

un
da

ry
Fo

rm
of

co
lo
ni
al

ru
le

J. Sieweke and S. Santoni The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

15



Neyman's potential outcome framework (also called the Neyman-Rubin
model; see Rubin, 2005). Neyman's framework is both simple and
transparent (Dunning, 2012). Scholars may want to use the difference-
of-means or difference-of-proportion tests that are widely applied in
laboratory experiments. Therefore, either a t-test(for smaller sample
sizes) or z-test(for larger sample sizes, see Dunning, 2012) could suffice
to conduct causal research with observational data.

Alternatively, a regression-based approach could be desirable when
qualitative evidence and/or institutional knowledge on the part of the
researchers indicate the treatment may not be random or as-if random.
Such an analytical strategy would enable a comparison between the
findings from the difference-of-means or difference-of-percentages test
with the estimates obtained through a multivariate regression con-
taining the covariates that are presumed to correlate with the treat-
ment. In the regression-based approach, the population regression
function is:

= + + + +y X t D tD u (1)

In Eq. (1), β represents the coefficient for a vector of covariates X; γ
represents the coefficient for the time trend common for treatment and
control group; λ represents the systematic difference in the outcome
across the treated and the control cases (group-specific time-invariant
difference); and δ represents the coefficient for the interaction of the
group and time variable, which estimates the average causal effect of
the treatment on the outcome y; and u represents the error term
(Imbens & Wooldridge, 2009).

Plausibility of the assumptions of the standard natural experiment. The
analysis of the standard natural experiment using the Neyman
framework builds on two assumptions. First, units are randomly or
as-if randomly assigned to the treatment. In order to provide evidence
of the quality of the (as-if) randomization, Dunning (2012) recommends

conducting balance tests. Currently, many researchers use mean-
difference tests (t-tests) to analyze variations between units in the
treatment and control group along relevant pre-treatment covariates.
However, this approach is sensitive to the sample size, i.e., even small
differences become statistically significant if the sample size is large. To
reduce this problem, scholars can use normalized differences, which are
unaffected by sample size (for a detailed discussion of how to calculate
the normalized differences, see Imbens & Wooldridge, 2009). A further
disadvantage of mean-difference tests is that it is difficult to determine
whether the control and treatment groups are balanced. For instance, if
researchers conduct t-tests for 20 covariates, we would expect to find at
least one statistically significant difference simply as the result of
chance. Therefore, we suggest conducting joint hypothesis tests, for
example by regressing the binary treatment variable on the covariates
and using a χ2 test to analyze whether the coefficient of the covariates
differs from zero (McKenzie, 2015).

Second, the Neyman framework builds on the assumption that the
outcomes of a unit are only influenced by the unit's treatment-assign-
ment status. This assumption is also called the noninterference as-
sumption or the “stable unit treatment value assumption (SUTVA)”
(Imbens & Rubin, 2015). SUTVA refers to a situation in which the
treatment status of other units affects a unit's outcome. For instance, a
company aims to analyze whether leadership training increases the
effectiveness of their leaders. For this reason, the company assigns some
leaders to a leadership training programme (treatment group), whereas
other leaders receive no training (control group). However, because
leaders work together within the same company and interact with each
other, leaders in the treatment group may share some of the knowledge
they learned in the training programme with leaders in the control
group. This spillover violates the SUTVA and leads to an under-
estimated average causal effect (Morgan & Winship, 2015). Un-
fortunately, there is currently no clear solution to SUTVA violations,

Fig. 8. Decision tree linking treatment attributes, assumptions, and forms of natural experiments.

J. Sieweke and S. Santoni The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

16



though Belloc et al. (2016) used corrected standard errors to deal with
such possible violations, and Selb and Munzert (2018) excluded units in
the control group which were in close spatial proximity to treated units,
because these units were particularly likely to be treated by accident.

Since there is no ‘solution’ to the SUTVA violation, we recommend
that (i) both the statistically adjusted and unadjusted estimation results
are reported, as this may provide insights into the extent to which a
possible SUTVA violation affects the results, and (ii) the role of social
interactions needs to be to explicitly taken into account, which could
reveal important boundary conditions for the effect under examination
(see Sinclair, 2011).

Testing the robustness of the results of the standard natural
experiment. There are several options to test the robustness of the
results of a standard natural experiment. Firstly, the results can be
tested for robustness if they include pre-treatment covariates in the
analysis. For instance, Beaman et al. (2012) showed the results of both
difference-in-means tests and ordinary least squares coefficients
adjusted for covariates despite random assignment of women to a
leadership position. Although the inclusion of covariates is unlikely to
have a high impact on the average causal effect in a natural experiment
with high plausibility of as-if random assignment, adding covariates –
especially those that are unbalanced between the treatment and control
group – increases the transparency and credibility of the results in the
eyes of other researchers. Therefore, the best approach is to estimate
the average causal effect with and without covariates and if there are
significant differences then potential reasons for these differences
should be explored in more detail.

Secondly, if the passing of a new law, regulation or quota is at the
basis of the experiment, then Matsa and Miller’s (2013) approach
should be followed, i.e., by conducting additional tests for different
types of units — e.g., units that almost complied with a quota or law
before the inception, and units that had a large distance from com-
pliance. Matsa and Miller argue that they would expect greater effects
for firms with a greater distance from compliance with the gender quota
than for firms that almost complied with the quota. Such an additional
test is important because it can provide further evidence that the ob-
served effect is caused by the new law, regulation, or quota and not by
an unrecognized event that affected the units in the treatment group.

Thirdly, Matsa and Miller (2013) also use matching methods (e.g.,
propensity score matching). Matching methods should be used if units
in the treatment and control group differ from each other with regard to
several (observable) covariates. The covariates can be used to match
treated units with control units that are highly similar with regard to
the observed covariates. Although matching methods are no replace-
ment for an as-if randomization, because they do not ensure that units
in the treatment and control groups do not differ with regard to ob-
served and unobserved covariates, these methods can provide further
insights into the robustness of the initial results.

Analyzing instrumental variable designs
Estimation of the average causal effect in the IV design. In the IV design
(see Fig. 4), we estimate the causal effect of an endogenous treatment
variable D by identifying an instrument z that affects D but is otherwise
unrelated to the outcome y (Abadie & Cattaneo, 2018). The key idea of
the IV design is that we only retain the variation in the treatment that is
caused by an exogenous variation in the instrument, while ruling out
the association between the treatment and possible covariates A and B
(see Fig. 4). For instance, in his study on the effects of military service
on future earnings, Angrist (1990) isolates the variation in the
treatment (i.e., military service) that was caused by an exogenous
variation (i.e., Vietnam draft lottery) of the instrument (i.e., eligibility
of being drafted for military service).

The Wald estimator is the simplest and most transparent way to

estimate the average causal effect in the IV design (Dunning, 2012):

= = =
= =

E Y Z E Y Z
E D Z E D Z

[ | 1] [ | 0]
[ | 1] [ | 0]

i i i i

i i i i (2)

The IV estimate ρ in Eq. (2) equals the difference in the outcome
variable between treated E[Yi|Zi =1] and E[Yi|Zi =1] controls divided
by the ratio between treated E[Di|Zi =1] and controls E[Di|Zi =1].
Such an equation provides some first insights into the IV estimate ρ.

While the Wald estimator should be applied for estimations with a
single instrument without any covariates, researchers recommend using
the two-staged least squares (2SLS) estimator for multiple instruments
or when covariates are added (Angrist & Pischke, 2009). In the latter
case, we use two steps to estimate the causal effect of the treatment. In
the first-stage (Eq. (3)), we regress the treatment variable D on a vector
of covariates X and on the exogenous instrument Z:

= + +D X Z v1 2 (3)

In the second-stage ( Eq. (4)), we regress the outcome variable (Y)
on the covariates (X) and predicted values of the treatment from the
first-stage regression:

= + +y X D u^1 2 (4)

where β2 denotes the average causal effect of the treatment.

Evaluation of the plausibility of the assumptions of the IV design. The IV
design relies on several assumptions. In line with Angrist and Pischke
(2009), we emphasize the following elements: (i) exogeneity of the
instrument; (ii) relevance of the instrument; and (iii) the exclusion
restriction.11 The first assumption – exogeneity of the instrument –
means that the instrument is uncorrelated with the error term u,
included in Eq. (4). In other words, the instrument is assumed not to
be related to the causes of the dependent variable (Sovey & Green,
2011). Arguing this assumption is consistent with a target population
regression function, and the dataset at hand is particularly problematic.
In fact, it is not possible to empirically test the exogeneity of an
instrument (Wooldridge, 2009). Furthermore, recent simulation studies
indicate that endogenous instruments produce causal effect estimates
“that are inferior to those reported by OLS regression” (Semadeni et al.,
2014, p. 1071). These concerns become less accentuated when units are
randomly assigned to the instrument (Dunning, 2012), as in the case of
lotteries (Angrist, 1990). Even if the assignment is not truly random,
one can still argue for the exogeneity of the instrument. For instance,
Bennedsen et al. (2007) point out that their instrument – the gender of
the firstborn child – is as-if random and they expand on qualitative
evidence by observing that technologies to identify the child's gender
before the birth were not widespread at the time, so that abortion due
to the child's gender was unlikely. These arguments provide convincing
evidence for the exogeneity of the instrument, despite the lack of a
direct test.

The second assumption – the relevance of the instrument – implies
that Z and D are correlated. Specifically, instruments can be categorized
into weak, moderate and strong according to the magnitude of the Z–D
correlation. In order to assess an instrument's strength, the canonical
test can be used which is based on the F-statistic of the first-stage re-
gression (Semadeni et al., 2014).12 Exploiting the canonical test, Olea
and Pflueger (2013) developed a weak-instrument test, which is robust
to heteroscedasticity, autocorrelation, and clustering, and which is
more efficient than the standard Stock and Yogo (2005) test. Strong
instruments should be the norm in the IV design, because weak and

11 Please note that assumptions(i) and (iii) are often combined. In the interest
of clarity, we follow Angrist and Pischke (2009) and separately consider each
assumption.

12 Interested readers find an overview of critical values for the weak instru-
ment test in Stock and Yogo (2005).

J. Sieweke and S. Santoni The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

17



moderate instruments lead to inflated standard errors, although the
estimated regression slopes are unbiased (Semadeni et al., 2014).

The third assumption – exclusion restriction – means that Z has no
influence on y apart from the effect that is conveyed through D (Sovey &
Green, 2011). Similarly to the exogeneity assumption, the exclusion
restriction cannot be assessed based on the available data. In fact, it
cannot be proved that the instrument – even when it results from a true
randomization – does not affect the dependent variable through alter-
native causal pathways (Morgan & Winship, 2015). Instead, the best
approach would be to: (i) critically analyze possible theoretical me-
chanisms through which the instrument may be related to the depen-
dent variable, and (ii) provide both logical arguments and qualitative
evidence that help to rule those mechanisms out (Sovey & Green, 2011).

Testing the robustness of the resultsof the IV design. Leadership scholars
have at least two alternatives to assess the robustness of an IV design's
results. First, estimated regression slopes could be compared across
models building on alternative instruments. For instance, Chintrakarn
et al. (2017) use the degree of religious adherence in the population
surrounding a firm's corporate headquarters in 1971 as instrument in
their main analyses; then, they provide a second model using a twenty-
year lag of the original instrument.

Second, sometimes the instrument influences the assignment to the
treatment, whereas it does not capture the timing of the treatment. For
instance, Bennedsen et al. (2007) explained that observed differences in
firm performance between firms with a family CEO and firms with an
outside CEO may also result from differences in the timing of CEO
succession (e.g., CEOs may retire at a different age). Therefore, the
authors check their initial results by estimating the model on a sub-
sample of the data — i.e., the instances in which the CEO transition
occurred while the incumbent CEO is in the ‘normal’ retirement age.
They even identified an additional instrument, CEO death, to test
whether their findings are robust when the timing of CEO succession is
credibly exogenous. These rigorous robustness checks help to rule out
alternative explanations for the observed relationships and strengthen
the causal inference.

Analyzing regression discontinuity designs
Estimation of the average causal effect. Before starting to analyze the
regression discontinuity design, leadership researchers need to check
whether the natural experiment represents a sharp or a fuzzy regression
discontinuity design. The sharp RD design is characterized by a perfect
compliance of the units; that is, all units above the threshold receive the
treatment and all units below the threshold are assigned to the control
group (or vice versa). In the fuzzy RD design, not all units with a score
above the threshold receive the treatment; instead, a score above the
threshold merely influences the probability that a unit will receive the
treatment (Lee & Lemieux, 2010). Our discussion in this section focuses
on the sharp RD design, because the fuzzy RD design has already been
discussed in the section “ Analyzing instrumental variable designs”.13

The analysis of the sharp RD design follows the principles of sim-
plicity and transparency (Dunning, 2012). As shown in Fig. 6, we re-
quire two variables for the analysis: X and x*. X represents the as-
signment variable and Xi represents the score of unit i on the assignment
variable; x* denotes the threshold or cut-off point for the assignment of
the treatment. Based on Xi and x*, we can create a binary treatment
variable, tD, that equals 1 if Xi >= x* and 0 if Xi < x * (please note
that whether the treatment is assigned if Xi >= x* or Xi <= x* de-
pends on the empirical context; we assume here that the treatment is
assigned if the score on the assignment variable exceeds the threshold).
The treatment variable is crucial for determining the discontinuity. The

regression model for the RD design is shown in Eq. (5):

= + + +y tD X x u( *)i i (5)

The crucial quantity of interest is the treatment effect, tD. The
coefficient δ indicates the discontinuity at the threshold (x *), which
represents the average causal effect of the treatment (Dunning, 2012).
The coefficient β represents the continuous effect of the assignment
variable, which is centered around the value of the threshold x*. Re-
searchers suggested that the slope of the regression should be allowed
to differ between the control group and the treatment group (e.g.,
Antonakis et al., 2010; Lee & Lemieux, 2010) by including an interac-
tion between the treatment variable and the assignment variable as
shown in Eq. (6):

= + + + +y tD X x tD X x u( *) ( *)i i i (6)

The coefficient τ represents the interaction between the assignment
variable and the treatment assignment and indicates whether the slope
differs between the control group and the treatment group.

Evaluation the plausibility of the assumptions of the RD design. Compared
to the instrumental variable design and the standard natural experiment
design, the RD design is based on mild assumptions (Lee & Lemieux,
2010). The crucial assumption underlying the RD design is that units
cannot precisely manipulate their score on the assignment variable (Lee
& Lemieux, 2010), because it ensures that units close to the threshold
are almost randomly assigned to the treatment and the control
condition. This assumption cannot be directly validated. However,
leadership scholars can conduct various tests that may falsify the
assumption. For instance, Arvate et al. (2018) tested (i) the balance
on covariates between units closely below and above the threshold, and
(ii) the density of the assignment variable.

Firstly, testing the balance on pre-treatment covariates between
units closely below and above the threshold provides insights into the
quality of the as-if randomization. If units cannot precisely manipulate
their score on the assignment variable, we would expect that units
closely above the threshold do not systematically differ from units
closely below the threshold with regard to pre-treatment covariates
(Cattaneo, Idrobo, & Titiunik, 2019). The balance test as described for
the standard natural experiment can be used to test the plausibility of
the as-if randomization. Although we suggest using different band-
widths around the threshold to check the robustness of the test, lea-
dership scholars should consider that observations in the treatment and
control group with a greater distance from the threshold will be more
likely to differ from each other than observations close to the threshold.

Secondly, to further check the assumption that units were not able
to precisely manipulate their score on the assignment variable,
McCrary’s (2008) test can be carried out. The test assumes that if units
have imprecise control over their score, we would expect to find that
the density of the assignment variable would be continuous. Con-
versely, a jump in the density around the threshold could be a sign of a
unit's ability to manipulate the assignment variable (McCrary, 2008).
Together, the results of these two tests can help leadership scholars to
provide evidence for the validity of the identifying assumption in the
RD design.

Testing the robustness of the results of the RD design. A further important
step in the RD design is to check the robustness of the results given that
various decisions may affect the size of the average causal effect.
Specifically, three decisions have received considerable attention in the
literature: (i) the inclusion of covariates; (ii) the selection of the
bandwidth; and (iii) the inclusion of higher-order polynomials.

First, leadership researchers need to decide whether they should
include covariates in the analysis. In RD designs, the inclusion of cov-
ariates is not as straightforward as in correlational studies. Due to the
as-if random assignment of units into treatment and control groups near
the threshold, a consistent estimate of the discontinuity can still be

13 Please note that the fuzzy RD design resembles an instrumental variable
design in which the assignment variable is the instrument (Lee & Lemieux,
2010).

J. Sieweke and S. Santoni The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

18



obtained without including covariates (Lee & Lemieux, 2010). Never-
theless, the current consensus is that covariates should be included in
RD designs – especially if covariates are discontinuously distributed at
the cut-off of the assignment variable – because they may reduce var-
iance and eliminate bias in the average causal effect (Frölich & Huber,
2019).

We recommend scholars to estimate the average causal effect both
with and without covariates. In a ‘strong’ RD design, the difference in
the average causal effect in both settings should be minimal given the
as-if random assignment. Yet, including covariates may provide insights
into the robustness of the results and is especially recommended if the
whole range of observations is included, i.e. even observations far away
from the threshold (Imbens & Lemieux, 2008).

Second, leadership researchers need to select a bandwidth, i.e., a
range of values around the threshold that should be included in the
analysis. Selecting the bandwidth is a crucial decision, because the re-
sults are often sensitive to the bandwidth (Cattaneo et al., 2019; Imbens
& Lemieux, 2008). Larger bandwidths have the advantage of reducing
the variance in the coefficient of the discontinuity, because of the use of
more observations, whereas smaller bandwidths reduce the likelihood
of mis-specifying the local polynomial (Cattaneo et al., 2019).

Although in most empirical contexts there is no ‘objective’ band-
width, there are, however, several statistical approaches for selecting an
optimal bandwidth (e.g., Cattaneo & Vazquez-Bare, 2016; Imbens &
Kalyanaraman, 2012). Whatever statistical approach or bandwidth se-
lection criteria, we strongly recommend following Imbens and Lemieux
(2008) and testing the sensitivity of findings in relation to different
bandwidth choices (e.g., twice and half the size of the original band-
width). This approach will reveal the level of robustness of the average
causal effect and may increase the credibility of the findings (see, e.g.,
Arvate et al., 2018).

Thirdly, researchers debate the use of higher order polynomials of
the assignment variable in RD designs. Some studies include high-order
polynomials (e.g., fourth- or fifth-order polynomials) of the assignment
variable in the regression to smoothen the regression function (Lee &
Lemieux, 2010). However, Gelman and Imbens (2019) argue against
this practice – unless there are strong theory-based reasons – because
estimates become noisier and the results are sensitive to the choice of
the high-order polynomials. Instead, they recommend using local low-
order polynomials (linear or quadratic) in RD designs, which have a
much lower variation in the estimates. We recommend the approach
described by Lee and Lemieux (2010), who suggest analyzing the ro-
bustness of the average causal effect to changes in the inclusion of
higher order polynomials both for a small and wide window around the
threshold. Again, this approach provides further insights into the ro-
bustness of the findings and may increase the credibility of the RD
design.

In addition to checking the robustness of the RD results for the three
decisions, two types of placebo tests are also worth conducting. First,
placebo cut-off tests check for a discontinuity at cut-off points where no
treatment should have been assigned. Finding a discontinuity at a
placebo cut-off may indicate confounding effects in the RD design. To
test for the presence of multiple treatments, Imbens and Lemieux

(2008) found a good approach by splitting their sample into two sub-
samples: sub-sample 1 includes all observations on the left of the initial
cut-off point (x*); sub-sample 2 includes all observations on the right of
x*. In each sub-sample, scholars should use the median value of the
assignment variable as the placebo cut-off, as this approach maximizes
statistical power. The same regression function can be used to run the
placebo test as shown in equation 6. In this case, however, tD, which
represents the placebo treatment variable, ideally does not differ from
zero in either of the sub-samples, which would indicate that no dis-
continuity is found at the placebo cut-off point.

Concluding remarks

Identifying causal relationships is becoming increasingly important
for leadership scholars and experimental designs play a key role in this
endeavor (Antonakis, 2017; Antonakis et al., 2010; Podsakoff &
Podsakoff, 2019). The aim of this paper was to complement the recent
experimental turn in leadership research by introducing natural ex-
perimental designs and discussing their potential for inferring causal
relationships in leadership research.

Although this paper focuses on the potential of natural experiments
and their implementation, it is also important to discuss some limita-
tions (see also Harrison & List, 2004; Sekhon & Titiunik, 2012). First, a
natural experiment is only as good as the plausibility of the as-if ran-
domization. If the as-if randomization is plausible, we can assume that
the internal validity of a natural experiment is almost as high as the
internal validity of a laboratory or field experiment. However, if the as-
if randomization is not plausible, then the internal validity of a natural
experiment is rather low. Therefore, leadership scholars need to criti-
cally evaluate the quality of the as-if randomization — based on
quantitative and qualitative evidence (Dunning, 2012).

Second, although natural experiments take place in a natural field
setting, which guarantees their ecological validity, the external validity
of natural experiments could be open to question. Often, the setting of a
natural experiment is unique, or the interventions apply to a very
specific group, which poses the question as to whether the findings can
be generalized to other populations in other contexts (Dunning, 2012).
To overcome this limitation, natural experiments can be combined with
observational studies.

Finally, we need to emphasize that a ‘good’ natural experiment is no
replacement for a ‘good’ research question. That is, leadership scholars
need to consider that a natural experiment is just a tool to infer causal
relationships; it is not an end in itself.

To sum up, the aim of this paper was to introduce the natural ex-
perimental design to leadership research. Although we have tried to
cover important parts of the literature regarding natural experiments,
we urge scholars interested in applying a natural experiment to ad-
ditionally consult the literature on the specific design (i.e., standard
natural experiment, IV design, RD design). We hope that this paper will
stimulate the use of natural experiments in leadership research and will
be a useful addition to the ‘experimental tool box’ of leadership scho-
lars.

Appendix A. Retrieved set of studies

The set of exhibits included in this Appendix A provides some descriptive information on the reviewed articles. Specifically, Fig. 9 illustrates the
distribution of the studies with respect to the disciplinary domain (as per the Scopus categories) and time. Table 8 details the source of the studies.

J. Sieweke and S. Santoni The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

19



Fig. 9. Counts of retrieved studies — disciplinary subjects occurrences over time. Notes. Disciplinary subjects as per the Scopus database. * ‘2019’ data concern the
first quarter of the year only.

Table 8
Counts of retrieved studies by journal (alphabetical order).

Journal Count of studies

Accounting Review 1
Accounting and Business Research 1
Accounting and Finance 1
Advances in Financial Economics 1
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1
American Economic Review 1
American Journal of Political Science 4
American Journal of Sociology 1
American Political Science Review 3
Applied Economics 1
Applied Economics Letters 2
British Accounting Review 1
Comparative Political Studies 3
Corporate Governance: An International Review 1
Corporate Ownership and Control 1
Economica 2
Electoral Studies 3
European Journal of Economics, Finance and Administrative Science 1
Financial Management 2
Financial Review 1
Gender in Management 1
Human Resource Management 1
Industrial and Corporate Change 1
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 1
International Interactions 1
International Journal of Social Economics 1
International Studies Quarterly 1
Journal of Accounting and Economics 1
Journal of Banking and Finance 2
Journal of Business Ethics 2
Journal of Business Finance and Accounting 2
Journal of Business Research 2
Journal of Business Venturing 1
Journal of Comparative Economics 1
Journal of Corporate Finance 4
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 1
Journal of Empirical Finance 1
Journal of Finance 1
Journal of Financial Economics 2
Journal of Financial Research 1
Journal of Labor Economics 1
Journal of Management 1
Journal of Public Economics 2
Leadership Quarterly 2
Management Science 2
Political Psychology 1

(continued on next page)

J. Sieweke and S. Santoni The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

20



Table 8 (continued)

Journal Count of studies

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 1
Public Administration 1
Public Administration Review 1
Public Choice 1
Quarterly Journal of Economics 2
Review of Economic Studies 1
Review of Financial Studies 1
School Effectiveness and School Improvement 1
Science 1
Small Business Economics 3
Social Science Quarterly 1

Appendix B. Topic modeling of abstracts

The natural language processing pipeline behind our topic model comprises several steps (see the Jupyter notebook attached to the submission as
Supplemental material). In the first step, we use the Python library spaCy to pre-process the data. Specifically, we perform the following set of string
manipulations:

• tokenization — sentences involved in the 1156 abstracts are segmented into words, numbers, punctuation;
• lemmatization — base form of a word are applied. For example, the lemma of ‘had’ is ‘have’;
• token removal — numbers and stop words (i.e., words that provide limited information about the meanings conveyed by a piece of text) are
filtered-out.

In the second step, we leverage the Python library Gensim to create the input for the topic model, namely the dictionary (i.e., the set of unique
tokens involved in the corpus of abstracts) and the corpus (i.e., a matrix containing the numeric transformation of each individual abstract in terms of
the set of unique tokens included in the dictionary).

In the third step, we use Mallet software to estimate a set of competing topic models, each of which retains a unique number of topics (ranging
from 10 to 29). We set the maximum number of topics equal to the number of categories included in Gardner et al. (2010). Considering the internal
validity of the various models (DiMaggio, Nag, & Blei, 2013) and the coherence score – a statistical metrics that expresses the face validity of the
inductively derived topics (see Mimno, Wallach, Talley, Leenders, & McCallum, 2011) – we retain the model with ten topics. The pattern of topics
associated with the best fitting model is shown in Fig. 10. The left-hand side of the chart employs multidimensional scaling to offer a low-di-
mensional representation of the relationships among the eleven topics. The right-hand side of the visualization reports the set of the thirty most
salient terms involved in the topic model. The live version of this visualization – available in html format as Supplemental materials – provides
additional insights regarding the pairing structure linking terms and topics. For example, the set of the most salient terms changes as one moves the
cursor over the bullets associated with the topics.

Finally, we use the topic model trained with Mallet to characterize each of the 87 studies included in the review along the various topics. This
enables us to see how natural experiment methods map onto the space of leadership phenomena and theories (at least as represented in The
Leadership Quarterly).

J. Sieweke and S. Santoni The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

21

https://spacy.io/
https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/
http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/topics.php


Fi
g.

10
.
V
is
ua

liz
at
io
n
of

th
e
to
pi
c
m
od

el
in
g
ou

tc
om

e.

J. Sieweke and S. Santoni The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

22



Appendix C. Supplementary data and Python code

Supplementary data and Python code to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101338.

References

Abadie, A., & Cattaneo, M. D. (2018). Econometric methods for program evaluation.
Annual Review of Economics, 10(1), 465–503.

Adams, R., Almeida, H., & Ferreira, D. (2009). Understanding the relationship between
founder-CEOs and firm performance. Journal of Empirical Finance, 16(1), 136–150.

Adhikari, B. K. (2018). Female executives and corporate cash holdings. Applied Economics
Letters, 25(13), 958–963.

Adkins, L. C., Carter, D. A., & Simpson, W. G. (2007). Managerial incentives and the use of
foreign-exchange derivatives by banks. Journal of Financial Research, 30(3), 399–413.

Aghion, P., Van Reenen, J., & Zingales, L. (2013). Innovation and institutional ownership.
American Economic Review, 103.0(1), 277–304.

Akyol, A. C., & Cohen, L. (2013). Who chooses board members? Advances in Financial
Economics, 16.0(nan), 43–75.

Amore, M. D., Garofalo, O., & Minichilli, A. (2014). Gender interactions within the family
firm. Management Science, 60(5), 1083–1097.

Amore, M. D., Miller, D., Le Breton-Miller, I., & Corbetta, G. (2017). For love and money:
Marital leadership in family firms. Journal of Corporate Finance, 46(nan), 461–476.

Angrist, J. D. (1990). Lifetime earnings and the Vietnam era draft lottery: evidence from
social security administrative records. American Economic Review, 80(3), 313–336.

Angrist, J. D., & Pischke, J.-S. (2009). Mostly harmless econometrics. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Antonakis, J. (2017). On doing better science: From thrill of discovery to policy im-
plications. Leadership Quarterly, 28(1), 5–21.

Antonakis, J., Bendahan, S., Jacquart, P., & Lalive, R. (2010). On making causal claims: a
review and recommendations. Leadership Quarterly, 21, 1086–1120.

Arora, P. (2018). Financially linked independent directors and bankruptcy reemergence:
The role of director effort. Journal of Management, 44(7), 2665–2689.

Artz, B. M., Goodall, A. H., & Oswald, A. J. (2017). Boss competence and worker well-
being. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 70(2), 419–450.

Arvate, P. R., Galilea, G. W., & Todescat, I. (2018). The queen bee: a myth? the effect of
top-level female leadership on subordinate females. The Leadership Quarterly, 29(5),
533–548.

Azoulay, P., Liu, C. C., & Stuart, T. E. (2017). Social influence given (Partially) deliberate
matching: Career imprints in the creation of academic entrepreneurs. American
Journal of Sociology, 122(4), 1223–1271.

Bae, K.-H., & Yi, J. (2008). The impact of the short-short rule repeal on the timing ability
of mutual funds. Journal of Business Finance and Accounting, 35(7-8), 969–997.

Bækgaard, M. (2011). The impact of formal organizational structure on politico-admin-
istrative interaction: Evidence from a natural experiment. Public Administration,
89(3), 1063 —1080.

Baldassarri, D., & Abascal, M. (2017). Field experiments across the social sciences. Annual
Review of Sociology, 43, 41–73.

Banks, G. C., Gooty, J., Ross, R. L., Williams, C. E., & Harrington, N. T. (2018). Construct
redundancy in leader behaviors: a review and agenda for the future. The Leadership
Quarterly, 29(1), 236–251.

Barros, C. P., & Nunes, F. (2007). Governance and CEO pay and performance in non-profit
organizations. International Journal of Social Economics, 34(11), 811–827.

Bascle, G. (2008). Controlling for endogeneity with instrumental variables in strategic
management research. Strategic Organization, 6(3), 285–327.

Beaman, L., Duflo, E., Pande, R., & Topalova, P. (2012). Female leadership raises as-
pirations and educational attainment for girls: A policy experiment in India. Science,
335(6068), 582–586.

Belloc, M., Drago, F., & Galbiati, R. (2016). Earthquakes, religion, and transition to self-
government in Italian cities. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4), 1875–1926.

Bennedsen, M., Nielsen, K., Perez-Gonzalez, F., & Wolfenzon, D. (2007). Inside the family
firm: The role of families in succession decisions and performance. Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 122(2), 647–691.

Bernile, G., Bhagwat, V., & Yonker, S. (2018). Board diversity, firm risk, and corporate
policies. Journal of Financial Economics, 127(3), 588–612.

Bhavnani, R. R. (2017). Do the effects of temporary ethnic group quotas persist? Evidence
from India. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9(3), 105–123.

Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 3(Jan), 993–1022.

Boas, T. C., & Hidalgo, F. D. (2011). Controlling the airwaves: Incumbency advantage and
community radio in Brazil. American Journal of Political Science, 55(4), 869–885.

Bound, J., Jaeger, D. A., & Baker, R. M. (1995). Problems with instrumental variables
estimation when the correlation between the instruments and the endogenous ex-
planatory variable is weak. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90(430),
443–450.

Breda, T., & Ly, S. T. (2015). Professors in core science fields are not always biased against
women: Evidence from France. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7.0(4),
53–75.

Brockman, P., Ma, T., & Ye, J. (2015). CEO compensation risk and timely loss recognition.
Journal of Business Finance and Accounting, 42.0(1-2), 204–236.

Butler, D. M. (2009). A regression discontinuity design analysis of the incumbency ad-
vantage and tenure in the U.S. house. Electoral Studies, 28(1), 123–128.

Byrd, J., Fraser, D. R., Scott Lee, D., & Tartaroglu, S. (2012). Are two heads better than

one? Evidence from the thrift crisis. Journal of Banking and Finance, 36.0(4), 957–967.
Cattaneo, M. D., Idrobo, N., & Titiunik, R. (2019). A practical introduction to regression

discontinuity designsVol.1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cattaneo, M. D., & Vazquez-Bare, G. (2016). The choice of neighborhood in regression

discontinuity designs. Observational Studies, 2(1), 134–146.
Chauchard, S. (2014). Can descriptive representation change beliefs about a stigmatized

group? Evidence from Rural India. American Political Science Review, 108(2),
403–422.

Chen, J., Cumming, D., Hou, W., & Lee, E. (2016). CEO accountability for corporate fraud:
Evidence from the split share structure reform in China. Journal of Business Ethics,
138(4), 787–806.

Chen, J., Leung, W. S., & Goergen, M. (2017). The impact of board gender composition on
dividend payouts. Journal of Corporate Finance, 43(nan), 86–105.

Cheng, S., Nagar, V., & Rajan, M. V. (2005). Identifying control motives in managerial
ownership: Evidence from antitakeover legislation. Review of Financial Studies, 18(2),
637–672.

Chintrakarn, P., Jiraporn, P., Tong, S., & Chatjuthamard, P. (2017). Exploring the effect of
religious piety on corporate governance: Evidence from anti-takeover defenses and
historical religious identification. Journal of Business Ethics, 141(3), 469–476 G.

Cohen, A., & Wang, C. C. Y. (2013). How do staggered boards affect shareholder value?
Evidence from a natural experiment. Journal of Financial Economics, 110.0(3),
627–641.

Coman, E. E. (2018). Local elites, electoral reform and the distribution of central gov-
ernment funds: Evidence from rOmania. Electoral Studies, 53(nan), 1–10.

Conroy, T., & Weiler, S. (2016). Does gender matter for job creation? Business ownership
and employment growth. Small Business Economics, 47(2), 397–419.

Conyon, M. J., & He, L. (2017). Firm performance and boardroom gender diversity: a
quantile regression approach. Journal of Business Research, 79(nan), 198–211.

Cox, G. W., Rosenbluth, F. M., & Thies, M. F. (2000). Electoral rules, career ambitions,
and party structure: Comparing factions in Japan's upper and lower houses. American
Journal of Political Science, 44(1), 115–122.

*Cuñat, V., & Guadalupe, M. (2009). Executive compensation and competition in the
banking and financial sectors. Journal of Banking and Finance, 33(3), 495–504.

Dahya, J., & McConnell, J. J. (2005). Outside directors and corporate board decisions.
Journal of Corporate Finance, 11(1-2), 37–60.

Dal Bó, E., Dal Bó, P., & Snyder, J. (2009). Political dynasties. Review of Economic Studies,
76(1), 115–142.

Dasgupta, A. (2018). Technological change and political turnover: The democratizing
effects of the green revolution in India. American Political Science Review, 112(4),
1111–1119.

de Paola, M., & Scoppa, V. (2015). Gender discrimination and evaluators' gender:
Evidence from italian academia. Economica, 82.0(325), 162–188.

de Paola, M., Scoppa, V., & Lombardo, R. (2010). Can gender quotas break down negative
stereotypes? evidence from changes in electoral rules. Journal of Public Economics,
94.0(5-6), 344–353.

de Vries, R. E. (2012a). Personality predictors of leadership styles and the self-other
agreement problem. Leadership Quarterly, 23(5), 809–821.

Delfgaauw, J., Dur, R., & Souverijn, M. (2018). Team incentives, task assignment, and
performance: a field experiment. The Leadership Quarterly. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
leaqua.2018.03.003 forthcoming.

Delis, M. D., Gaganis, C., Hasan, I., & Pasiouras, F. (2017). The effect of board directors
from countries with different genetic diversity levels on corporate performance.
Management Science, 63(1), 231–249.

DiMaggio, P., Nag, M., & Blei, D. (2013). Exploiting affinities between topic modeling and
the sociological perspective on culture: Application to newspaper coverage of US
government arts funding. Poetics, 41(6), 570–606.

Dinh, J. E., Lord, R. G., Gardner, W. L., Meuser, J. D., Liden, R. C., & Hu, J. (2014).
Leadership theory and research in the new millennium: Current theoretical trends
and changing perspectives. The Leadership Quarterly, 25(1), 36–62.

Driver, C., & Guedes, M. J. C. (2017). R & D and CEO departure date: Do financial in-
centives make CEOs more opportunistic? Industrial and Corporate Change, 26(5),
801–820.

Dunning, T. (2012). Natural experiments in the social sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Dunning, T., & Nilekani, J. (2013). Ethnic quotas and political mobilization: caste, par-
ties, and distribution in Indian village councils. American Political Science Review,
107(1), 35–56.

Flammer, C., & Bansal, P. (2017). Does a long-term orientation create value? Evidence
from a regression discontinuity. Strategic Management Journal, 38, 1827–1847.

Frantz, E., & Stein, E. A. (2017). Countering coups: Leadership succession rules in dic-
tatorships. Comparative Political Studies, 50(7), 935–962.

Frijters, P., Haisken-DeNew, J. P., & Shields, M. A. (2005). The causal effect of income on
health: Evidence from german reunification. Journal of Health Economics, 24(5),
997–1017.

Frölich, M., & Huber, M. (2019). Including covariates in the regression discontinuity
design. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 37(4), 736–748. https://doi.org/10.
1080/07350015.2017.1421544 forthcoming.

Gabel, M., & Scheve, K. (2007). Estimating the effect of elite communications on public
opinion using instrumental variables. American Journal of Political Science, 51(4),

J. Sieweke and S. Santoni The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

23

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101338
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0270
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2018.03.003
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2018.03.003
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf9510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf9510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf9510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0315
https://doi.org/10.1080/07350015.2017.1421544
https://doi.org/10.1080/07350015.2017.1421544
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0325


1013–1028.
Gardner, W. L., Lowe, K. B., Moss, T. W., Mahoney, K. T., & Cogliser, C. C. (2010).

Scholarly leadership of the study of leadership: a review of the leadership quarterly's
second decade, 2000-2009. Leadership Quarterly, 21(6), 922–958.

Gelman, A., & Imbens, G. (2019). Why high-order polynomials should not be used in
regression discontinuity designs. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 37(3),
447–456. https://doi.org/10.1080/07350015.2017.1366909 forthcoming.

Gittell, J. H., Weinberg, D. B., Bennett, A. L., & Miller, J. A. (2008). Is the doctor in? a
relational approach to job design and the coordination of work. Human Resource
Management, 47(4), 729–755.

Gormley, T. A., Matsa, D. A., & Milbourn, T. (2012). CEO compensation and corporate
risk: Evidence from a natural experiment. Journal of Accounting and Economics,
56.0(2-3), 79–101.

Grönqvist, E., & Lindqvist, E. (2016). The making of a manager: evidence from military
officer training. Journal of Labor Economics, 34(4), 869–898.

Guadalupe, M., & Wulf, J. (2010). The flattening firm and product market competition:
The effect of trade liberalization on corporate hierarchies. American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 2.0(4), 105–127.

Haack, P., & Sieweke, J. (2018). The legitimacy of inequality: Integrating the perspectives of
system justification and social judgment, 55(3), 486–516.

Han, J., & Zhang, G. (2018). Politically connected boards, value or cost: evidence from a
natural experiment in China. Accounting and Finance, 58(1), 149–169.

Harjoto, M. A., & Rossi, F. (2019). Religiosity, female directors, and corporate social
responsibility for Italian listed companies. Journal of Business Research, 95(nan),
338–346.

Harrison, G. W., & List, J. A. (2004). Field experiments. Journal of Economic Literature,
42(4), 1009–1055.

Hearn, B., & Filatotchev, I. (2019). Founder retention as CEO at IPO in emerging
economies: The role of private equity owners and national institutions. Journal of
Business Venturing, 34(3), 418–438.

Heck, R. H., & Moriyama, K. (2010). Examining relationships among elementary schools'
contexts, leadership, instructional practices, and added-year outcomes: a regression
discontinuity approach. School Effectiveness and School Improvement, 21(4), 377–408.

Hidalgo, F. D., Canello, J., & Lima-de Oliveira, R. (2016). Can Politicians Police
Themselves? Natural Experimental Evidence From Brazil's Audit Courts. Comparative
Political Studies, 49(13), 1739–1773.

Honnibal, M., & Montani, I. (2017). Spacy 2: Natural language understanding with bloom
embeddings, convolutional neural networks, and incremental parsing. In:
Unpublished technical report.

Hooghiemstra, R., Kuang, Y. F., & Qin, B. (2017). Does obfuscating excessive CEO pay
work? the influence of remuneration report readability on say-on-pay votes.
Accounting and Business Research, 47(6), 695–729.

Huber, G. A., & Arceneaux, K. (2007). Identifying the persuasive effects of presidential
advertising. American Journal of Political Science, 51(4), 957–977.

Imbens, G., & Kalyanaraman, K. (2012). Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression
discontinuity estimator. The Review of Economic Studies, 79(3), 933–959.

Imbens, G. W., & Lemieux, T. (2008). Regression discontinuity designs: a guide to prac-
tice. Journal of Econometrics, 142(2), 615–635.

Imbens, G., & Rubin, D. B. (2015). Causal inference for statistics, social and biomedical
sciences. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Imbens, G. W., & Wooldridge, J. M. (2009). Recent developments in the econometrics of
program evaluation. Journal of Economic Literature, 47(1), 5–86.

Izgi, B. B., & Akkaş, I. (2012). Do women at the top make a difference? Women in
management and firm performance in Turkey. European Journal of Economics Finance
and Administrative Sciences, nan(53), 34–40.

Jayaraman, S., & Milbourn, T. (2015). CEO equity incentives and financial misreporting:
The role of auditor expertise. Accounting Review, 90.0(1), 321–350.

Jiraporn, P., & Lee, S. M. (2018). Do Co-Opted directors influence dividend policy?
Financial Management, 47(2), 349–381.

Jiraporn, P., Lee, S. M., Park, K. J., & Song, H. (2018). How do independent directors
influence innovation productivity? a quasi-natural experiment. Applied Economics
Letters, 25(7), 435–441.

Jones, B. F., & Olken, B. A. (2005). Do leaders matter? national leadership and growth
since world war II. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 835–864.

Kahn, M. E., Li, P., & Zhao, D. (2015). Water pollution progress at borders: The role of
changes in China's political promotion incentives. American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 7.0(4), 223–242.

Khwaja, A. I. (2009). Can good projects succeed in bad communities? Journal of Public
Economics, 93(7-8), 899–916.

Kılıç, M., & Kuzey, C. (2016). The effect of board gender diversity on firm performance:
evidence from Turkey. Gender in Management, 31(7), 434–455.

Knott, A. M. (2001). The dynamic value of hierarchy. Management Science, 47(3),
430–448.

Laustsen, L., & Petersen, M. B. (2017). Perceived conflict and leader dominance:
Individual and contextual factors behind preferences for dominant leaders. Political
Psychology, 38(6), 1083–1101.

Lechler, M., & McNamee, L. (2018). Indirect colonial rule undermines support for de-
mocracy: Evidence from a natural experiment in Namibia. Comparative Political
Studies, 51(14), 1858–1898.

Lee, D. S., & Lemieux, T. (2010). Regression discontinuity designs in economics. Journal of
Economic Literature, 48(2), 281–355.

Li, Y., Gong, M., Zhang, X. Y., & Koh, L. (2018). The impact of environmental, social, and
governance disclosure on firm value: The role of CEO power. British Accounting
Review, 50(1), 60–75.

Lin, C., Lin, P., Song, F. M., & Li, C. (2011). Managerial incentives, CEO characteristics
and corporate innovation in China's private sector. Journal of Comparative Economics,

39.0(2), 176–190.
Markussen, S., & Røed, K. (2017). The gender gap in entrepreneurship – the role of peer

effects. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 134(nan), 356–373.
Matsa, D. A., & Miller, A. R. (2013). A female style in corporate leadership? Evidence

from quotas. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(3), 136–169.
McCallum, A. K. (2002). MALLET: A machine learning for language toolkit.
McCrary, J. (2008). Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity

design: a density test. Journal of Econometrics, 142(2), 698–714.
McKenzie, D. (2015, 02 04). Tools of the trade: a joint test of orthogonality when testing

for balance Retrieved from https://blogs.worldbank.org/impactevaluations/tools-
trade-joint-test-orthogonality-when-testing-balance

Mohr, J. W., & Bogdanov, P. (2013). Introduction—topic models: What they are and why
they matter. Poetics, 41(6), 545–569.

Morgan, S. L., & Winship, C. (2015). Counterfactuals and causal inference: Methods and
principles for social research. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Nicolosi, G., & Yore, A. S. (2015). “i do”: Does marital status affect how much CEOs “do”?
Financial Review, 50.0(1), 57–88.

Olea, J. L. M., & Pflueger, C. (2013). A robust test for weak instruments. Journal of
Business & Economic Statistics, 31(3), 358–369.

Pascal, D., Mersland, R., & Mori, N. (2017). The influence of the CEO's business education
on the performance of hybrid organizations: the case of the global microfinance in-
dustry. Small Business Economics, 49(2), 339–354.

Podsakoff, P. M., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2019). Experimental designs in management and
leadership research: strengths, limitations, and recommendations for improving
publishability. The Leadership Quarterly, 30(1), 11–33.

Poulos, J. (2019). Land lotteries, long-term wealth, and political selection. Public Choice,
178(1-2), 217–230.

Řehůřek, R., & Sojka, P. (2011). Gensim—python Framework for Vector Space Modelling.
NLP Centre, Faculty of InformaticsBrno, Czech Republic: Masaryk University 3(2).

Rickman, N., & Witt, R. (2008). Favouritism and financial incentives: a natural experi-
ment. Economica, 75(298), 296–309.

Robinson, G., McNulty, J. E., & Krasno, J. S. (2009). Observing the counterfactual? the
search for political experiments in nature. Political Analysis, 17, 341–357.

Rouse, K. E. (2012). The impact of high school leadership on subsequent educational
attainment. Social Science Quarterly, 93(1), 110–129.

Rubin, D. B. (2005). Causal inference using potential outcomes: design, modeling, deci-
sions. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 100(469), 322–331.

Sabatier, M. (2015). A women's boom in the boardroom: effects on performance? Applied
Economics, 47.0(26), 2717–2727.

Sekhon, J. S., & Titiunik, R. (2012). When natural experiments are neither natural nor
experiments. American Political Science Review, 106(1), 35–57.

Selb, P., & Munzert, S. (2018). Examining a most likely case for strong campaign effects:
Hitler's speeches and the rise of the nazi party, 1927–1933. American Political Science
Review, 112(4), 1050–1066.

Semadeni, M., Withers, M. C., & Certo, S. T. (2014). The perils of endogeneity and in-
strumental variables in strategy research: Understanding through simulations.
Strategic Management Journal, 35(7), 1070–1079.

Shadish, W. R., Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (2002). Experimental and quasi-experimental
designs for generalized causal inference. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Shea, P. E., & Solis, J. A. (2018). Leaders, tenure, and the politics of sovereign credit.
International Interactions, 44(2), 294–320.

Shue, K., & Townsend, R. R. (2017). How do Quasi-Random option grants affect CEO
Risk-Taking? The Journal of Finance, 72(6), 2551–2588.

Siming, L. (2016). Orders of merit and CEO compensation: Evidence from a natural ex-
periment. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 24(1), 64–78.

Sinclair, B. (2011). Design and analysis of experiments in multilevel populations. In J. N.
Druckman, D. P. Green, J. H. Kuklinski, & A. Lupia (Eds.). Cambridge handbook of
experimental political science (pp. 481–493). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Slater, M. J., Turner, M. J., Evans, A. L., & Jones, M. V. (2018). Capturing hearts and
minds: The influence of relational identification with the leader on followers' mobi-
lization and cardiovascular reactivity. The Leadership Quarterly, 29(3), 379–388.

Snow, J. (1855). Mode of communication of cholera. London: John Churchill.
Sovey, A. J., & Green, D. P. (2011). Instrumental variables estimation in political science:

A readers' guide. American Journal of Political Science, 55(1), 188–200.
Staines, G., Tavris, C., & Jayaratne, T. E. (1974). The queen bee syndrome. Psychology

Today, 7(8), 55–60.
Starr, N. (1997). Nonrandom risk: The 1970 draft lottery. Journal of Statistical

Education, 5(2).
Stock, J. H., & Yogo, M. (2005). Testing for weak instruments in linear IV regression. In D.

W. K. Andrews, & J. H. Stock (Eds.). Identification and inference for econometric models:
Essays in honor of Thomas Rothenberg (pp. 80–108). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Stoker, J. I., Garretsen, H., & Soudis, D. (2019). Tightening the leash after a threat: a
multi-level event study on leadership behavior following the financial crisis. The
Leadership Quarterly, 30(2), 199–214.

Sun, L., & Hovey, M. (2013). The endogeneity of executive compensation and its impact
on management discretionary behavior over financial reporting. Corporate Ownership
and Control, 11(1 L), 836–855.

Tabvuma, V., Bui, H. T. M., & Homberg, F. (2014). Adaptation to externally driven
change: The impact of political change on job satisfaction in the public sector. Public
Administration Review, 74(3), 384–395.

Thistlethwaite, D. L., & Campbell, D. T. (1960). Regression-discontinuity analysis: an
alternative to the ex post facto experiment. Journal of Educational Psychology, 51(6),
309–317.

Tosun, O. K. (2016). The effect of CEO option compensation on the capital structure: a
natural experiment. Financial Management, 45(4), 953–979.

J. Sieweke and S. Santoni The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

24

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0335
https://doi.org/10.1080/07350015.2017.1366909
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf8250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf8250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0510
https://blogs.worldbank.org/impactevaluations/tools-trade-joint-test-orthogonality-when-testing-balance
https://blogs.worldbank.org/impactevaluations/tools-trade-joint-test-orthogonality-when-testing-balance
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0530
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0545
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0545
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0545
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0550
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0555
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0565
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0565
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0570
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0570
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0575
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0575
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0580
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0580
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0590
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0595
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0595
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0595
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0600
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0600
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0605
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0605
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0610
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0610
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0615
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0615
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0620
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0620
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0620
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0625
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0625
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0625
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0630
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0635
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0635
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0640
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0640
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0645
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0645
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0650
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0650
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0650
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0650
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0655
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0655
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0655
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0660
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0660
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0660
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0665
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0665
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0665
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0670
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0670
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0670
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0675
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0675


Valdini, M. E. (2012). A deterrent to diversity: The conditional effect of electoral rules on
the nomination of women candidates. Electoral Studies, 31(4), 740–749.

Vo, T. T. N., & Canil, J. M. (2019). CEO pay disparity: Efficient contracting or managerial
power? Journal of Corporate Finance, 54(nan), 168–190.

Wing, C., Simon, K., & Bello-Gomez, R. A. (2018). Designing difference in difference
studies: Best practices for public health policy research. Annual Review of Public
Health, 39(1), 453–469.

Wooldridge, J. M. (2009). Introductory econometrics - a modern approach. Mason:
Thompson Higher Education.

Wu, W. C. (2015). When do Dictators Decide to Liberalize Trade Regimes? Inequality and
Trade Openness in Authoritarian Countries. International Studies Quarterly, 59(4),
790–801.

Wyrwich, M. (2015). Entrepreneurship and the intergenerational transmission of values.
Small Business Economics, 45.0(1), 191–213.

Yang, Y., Chawla, N. V., & Uzzi, B. (2019). A network's gender composition and com-
munication pattern predict women's leadership success. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 116(6), 2033–2038.

Yeow, J., & Martin, R. (2013). The role of self-regulation in developing leaders: a long-
itudinal field experiment. The Leadership Quarterly, 24(5), 625–637.

References included in the Appendix

Mimno, D., Wallach, H. M., Talley, E., Leenders, M., & McCallum, A. (2011, July).
Optimizing semantic coherence in topic models. Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (pp. 262–272). Association for
Computational Linguistics.

J. Sieweke and S. Santoni The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101338

25

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0680
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0680
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0685
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0685
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0690
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0690
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0690
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0695
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0695
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0700
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0700
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0700
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0705
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0705
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0710
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0710
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0710
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0715
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0715
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0720
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0720
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0720
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30847-6/rf0720

