The Leadership Quarterly

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua

State-of-the-science review of leader-follower dyads research

Jayoung Kima,⁎, Francis J. Yammarinob, Shelley D. Dionneb, Rory Eckardtb, Minyoung Cheongc,
Chou-Yu Tsaib, Jie Guob, Jin Won Parkb

a Bass Center for Leadership Studies, Binghamton University, State University of New York, Binghamton, NY 13902-6000, United States of America
b Bass Center for Leadership Studies and School of Management, Binghamton University, State University of New York, United States of America
c School of Graduate Professional Studies at Great Valley, Pennsylvania State University, United States of America

A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords:
Leader-follower dyads
Dyadic theories
Dyadic methods
Nomological network of leader-follower dyadic
relationships

A B S T R A C T

Despite its importance in multilevel research, the dyad level of analysis has been known as the most poorly
understood level. Suggestions have been made recently in terms of levels alignment issues and methodologies to
enhance the understanding of dyadic phenomena. Given recent remedies for dyads research and that the leader-
follower dyad is generally considered the key dyad in organizations, we conducted a comprehensive review of
the current state of leader-follower dyads research to assess what we know and how much we know about
leader-follower dyads research conducted at the dyad level. Specifically, we summarized empirical studies that
focused on leader-follower dyads that used data collected on the same variables from both dyadic partners. This
review involved coding studies of these “pure” leader-follower dyads based on several dyadic theories (e.g.,
vertical dyad linkage, individualized leadership, leader-member exchange, leader-follower congruence) and
multiple analytic methods (e.g., multilevel modeling, polynomial regression, WABA) that dealt with leader-
follower dyads directly. Based on the results, this review generated a nomological network of constructs for
understanding leader-follower dyads and to provide suggestions for future leader-follower dyads research.

Introduction

The leader-follower dyad, a unit composed of one leader and one
follower who are interdependent, is generally identified as the key dyad
among multiple types of dyads in organizations (e.g., Bass, 2008; Gooty
& Yammarino, 2011; Yammarino & Gooty, 2017) and has been the
focus of numerous leadership studies (see Dionne et al., 2014; Gooty,
Serban, Thomas, Gavin, & Yammarino, 2012; Yammarino, Dionne,
Chun, & Dansereau, 2005). However, of the four levels of analysis in a
typical levels framework (individual, dyad, group/team, and collective/
organization - Dansereau, Alutto, & Yammarino, 1984), the dyad level
is known as the most poorly understood level (Gooty & Yammarino,
2011; Yammarino & Gooty, 2017) and has often been ignored in mul-
tilevel research (Tse & Ashkanasy, 2015; Yammarino et al., 2005).

The major reason contributing to the lack of understanding of the
dyad level is levels of analysis misalignment issues. In particular, there
is an emerging consensus among organizational behavior and leader-
ship scholars that when pure dyadic phenomenon is focal, it may be
misleading to theorize and hypothesize at the dyad level but measure or

assess the phenomenon from only one side of the dyadic partnership (an
individual-level approach, e.g., individual's perceptions of the dyadic
phenomenon) (Gooty et al., 2012; Gooty & Yammarino, 2011;
Krasikova & LeBreton, 2012; Tse & Ashkanasy, 2015; Yammarino &
Gooty, 2017). Pure dyadic phenomena reside conceptually and operate
empirically at the dyad level (not the individual level) and can include
notions such as dyad characteristics (e.g., dyadic tenure, demographic
compositions), emergent properties (e.g., interaction, relationship, ex-
change) shared within the dyad, quality of those emergent properties as
assessed by both members, and (dis)agreement between the dyadic
partners. Since dyad-level phenomena are mostly emergent from the
interaction between the two individuals (dyadic members or partners)
(Gooty & Yammarino, 2011), measuring a variable of interest from
solely one dyadic partner would lead to an incomplete view of the
phenomenon of interest and may result in a misrepresentation of the
dyadic relationship (Krasikova & LeBreton, 2012).

In other words, when understanding the (shared) reality of the
dyadic relationship is of interest, rather than one person's perception of
the relationship, taking a dual perspective (Paglis & Green, 2002) will

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101306
Received 30 November 2017; Received in revised form 19 July 2019; Accepted 23 July 2019

⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: jkim416@binghamton.edu (J. Kim), fjyammo@binghamton.edu (F.J. Yammarino), sdionne@binghamton.edu (S.D. Dionne),

reckardt@binghamton.edu (R. Eckardt), mxc1016@psu.edu (M. Cheong), ctsai@binghamton.edu (C.-Y. Tsai), jguo40@binghamton.edu (J. Guo),
jpark285@binghamton.edu (J.W. Park).

The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101306

Available online 28 August 2019
1048-9843/ © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

T

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/10489843
https://www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101306
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101306
mailto:jkim416@binghamton.edu
mailto:fjyammo@binghamton.edu
mailto:sdionne@binghamton.edu
mailto:reckardt@binghamton.edu
mailto:mxc1016@psu.edu
mailto:ctsai@binghamton.edu
mailto:jguo40@binghamton.edu
mailto:jpark285@binghamton.edu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101306
http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101306&domain=pdf


provide a more valid understanding of the focal dyadic phenomenon.
Measuring a variable of interest only from one dyadic member's per-
spective assumes that this focal person's view represents two possibly
different views and ignores the other member's viewpoint. Omitting one
member's perspective is potentially problematic as one person's per-
ception may not be enough to represent two parties' perceptions of the
shared dyadic experience, and two people's views toward an identical
object can be either similar or different (Atwater & Yammarino, 1997;
Matta, Scott, Koopman, & Conlon, 2015). The general idea of con-
sidering all participating parties in the phenomenon of interest is
therefore critical from a validity standpoint. It is interesting to note that
this approach is regularly used in group- and team-level studies, where
data are frequently collected from all group and team members. In a
similar approach, when interested in pure dyadic phenomenon, re-
searchers could take both dyadic partners' view into account and collect
data from all (both) dyad members (Dansereau et al., 1984; Krasikova &
LeBreton, 2012; Tse & Ashkanasy, 2015; Yammarino & Gooty, 2017).

As these levels-of-analysis misalignment issues for the dyad level are
becoming more understood and interest in applying potential remedies
have increased (Krasikova & LeBreton, 2012; Tse & Ashkanasy, 2015;
Yammarino & Gooty, 2017), we believe it is timely to review the cur-
rent state-of-the-science of leader-follower dyads research. Our focus in
this review is to take stock of what we know and how much we know
about pure leader-follower dyadic phenomena. In doing so, we generate
a nomological network for leader-follower dyads research to represent
current empirical findings and highlight research areas that require
further attention. We limit this review to “pure” leader-follower dyadic
studies (see Gooty & Yammarino, 2011) that align the levels of theory,
measurement, analysis, and inference at the dyad level. Such studies
theorize a dyad-level phenomenon (e.g., dyad characteristics, emergent
properties, (dis)agreement in dyads), assess at least one variable about
the leader, follower, or relationship from both dyadic partners' per-
spectives, and generate dyad-level variables by matching both dyadic
partners' responses. As our focus is on the pure dyad level, we will not
be reviewing studies that mainly examined the correlates, causes, or
effects of individual-level perceptions of the relationship (e.g., follo-
wer's leader-member exchange (LMX) perception) (see Dulebohn,
Bommer, Liden, Brouer, & Ferris, 2012).

Our work differs from previous reviews that incorporated leader-
follower dyadic theories (e.g., Dionne et al., 2014; Gooty et al., 2012;
Krasikova & LeBreton, 2012; Liden, Anand, & Vidyarthi, 2016; Sin,
Nahrgang, & Morgeson, 2009; Tse, Troth, Ashkanasy, & Collins, 2018;
Yammarino et al., 2005) in that we have a specific focus on a single
level of analysis (i.e., dyad level only) and yet a broader focus in terms
of theories, as we are not limiting our review to LMX, one of the most
studied theories on leader-follower relationship. Contrary to
Yammarino et al. (2005)'s comprehensive review on leadership and
levels of analysis that incorporated various leadership theories and
pinpointed levels of analysis misalignment issues, we particularly focus
on studies of dyad-level theories and summarize the current state of
leader-follower dyads research. Moreover, beyond Dionne et al.
(2014)'s more up-to-date review that examined levels of analysis in-
corporation in both conceptual and empirical leadership research
published only in The Leadership Quarterly, this review focuses explicitly
on dyad-level leadership studies published in several top organizational
behavior and management journals and aims to summarize leader-fol-
lower dyads research in terms of theories, methods, variables, and
variable dimensions.

In addition, our review differs from the extant reviews on leader-
follower dyads that focus on levels-based issues only within LMX re-
search (Gooty et al., 2012), only with regard to methodological issues in
dyads research (Krasikova & LeBreton, 2012), only on LMX agreement
(Sin et al., 2009), or only on the state of affect and LMX research from a
multilevel perspective (Tse et al., 2018). Rather, our focus is to review
pure dyad-level studies in terms of the usage of theories, methods, and
variables in a broader scope. In terms of theories and variables, our

scope includes but is not limited to dyad-level LMX (Tse et al., 2018)
and/or LMX agreement (Sin et al., 2009). With respect to pure dyadic
level investigations, we also consider vertical dyad linkage (VDL, e.g.,
Dansereau, Graen, & Haga, 1975), individualized leadership (e.g.,
Dansereau et al., 1995), LMX, relational leadership theory (RLT, e.g.,
Uhl-Bien, 2006), and leader-follower congruence (e.g., Kristof-Brown,
Zimmerman, & Johnson, 2005). With regard to methods, we are not
focusing on raising methodological concerns but rather concentrating
on understanding how each dyadic research method proposed and re-
viewed elsewhere (e.g., Gooty & Yammarino, 2011; Krasikova &
LeBreton, 2012) - such as multilevel modeling, polynomial regression,
Within and Between Analysis (WABA), and Actor-Partner Inter-
dependence Model (APIM)/One-With-Many Model (OWM) - has been
utilized in leader-follower dyads studies. Finally, this review is distinct
from Liden et al. (2016)'s theoretical/conceptual review, which centers
on the development and nature of dyadic relationships, as we review
empirical leader-follower dyads studies and concentrate on the vari-
ables used in those studies to generate a nomological network for
leader-follower dyads research.

In summary, we extend the findings from the aforementioned re-
views, first, by capturing studies on leader-follower dyads published in
multiple journal outlets; second, by including dyadic relationship-based
studies not limited to only LMX theory; third, by reviewing studies that
include variables of focus assessed from both dyadic partners; and
fourth, by developing a nomological network relevant for leader-fol-
lower dyads theory building and testing.

In the following sections, to help frame our review, we provide an
overview of current theories on leader-follower dyads, suggested re-
search methods for examining dyadic phenomena, and levels and di-
mensionality issues regarding leader-follower dyads. To explore how
specific theories and methods have been utilized to examine dyadic
phenomenon, we develop targeted research questions to be addressed
via comprehensive review results derived from coding pure leader-fol-
lower dyads studies. Ultimately, we generate a nomological network
derived from key variables within existing dyad studies and present the
connection among these variables to summarize the current state of
leader-follower dyads research. Based on review results and the pro-
posed nomological network, we suggest future directions for leader-
follower dyads research.

Overview and research questions

Theories of leader-follower dyads

We initially employed five theories (i.e., VDL, Individualized
Leadership, LMX, Relational Leadership, Leader-Follower Congruence)
on leader-follower dyads or leader-follower relationships identified in a
previous review by Dionne et al. (2014) as the framework to categorize
leader-follower dyads studies in our review. These five theories re-
present leadership generally proposed as pure leader-follower dyadic
relations of interest.

Vertical dyad linkage (VDL)
VDL challenged the assumptions of the traditional leadership ap-

proach (i.e., Average Leadership Style, ALS) and explained the me-
chanism of differentiated relationship development by introducing the
concept of ‘negotiating latitude’ (Dansereau et al., 1975; Dansereau,
Cashman, & Graen, 1973; Graen, 1976). Specifically, depending on the
degree of the negotiating latitude within dyads, the dyadic relationship
between supervisor and subordinate can be either supervision (low
negotiating latitude) or leadership (high negotiating latitude)
(Dansereau et al., 1975). As VDL addressed a separation of in-groups
and out-groups within an existing group, the level of analysis for VDL
was suggested as dyads within group (see Dansereau, Yammarino, &
Markham, 1995).

Empirical support for VDL showed mixed results. VDL was

J. Kim, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101306

2



supported with superior-manager dyads in a public university setting
(Dansereau et al., 1975; Liden & Graen, 1980), but with different
samples (Rosse & Kraut, 1983) and different measures of negotiating
latitude and analytical methods (Nachman, Dansereau, & Naughton,
1983), the results were inconsistent with the early studies. The con-
flicting results raised questions about the validity of the negotiating
latitude measure and the level of analysis of VDL.

Despite these questions, VDL made a significant contribution to the
field by challenging the assumption of ALS regarding leader-follower
relationships and suggesting such relationships are often differentiated
in a group context. This was a new perspective on leader-follower re-
lationships that placed the ‘dyad’ as a central unit of analysis for lea-
dership research. As a result, VDL became the foundation of other
leader-follower dyadic relationships theories.

Individualized Leadership
Knowing that leaders form differentiated relationships with fol-

lowers, Dansereau et al. (1984) provided empirical support for the level
of the leader-follower relationship such that perceptions of investments
and returns in the relationship were similar between the leader and
follower and this pattern was replicated across all dyads with only the
degree of investments and returns varying. The notion that a leader and
a follower share similar perceptions but the degree of perceptions differ
from dyad to dyad was further developed as individualized leadership
theory (Dansereau, 1995; Dansereau et al., 1995; Yammarino &
Dansereau, 2002). Individualized leadership focuses on the reciprocity
(i.e., investments and returns) process that makes two individuals (i.e.,
leader and follower) become (or emerge as) a dyad. Specifically, the
iterative process of exchanging support for self-worth and satisfying
performance between leader and follower helps the relationship be-
tween the dyadic partners to become unique and independent from
other dyads and the group, and fosters the interdependence within the
dyad (Yammarino & Dansereau, 2002).

Individualized leadership has received empirical support from both
quantitative and qualitative studies such that support for self-worth and
satisfying performance (measured from both leader and follower per-
spectives in quantitative studies) showed similarity within the dyads
and differences across the dyads (Dansereau et al., 1995; Wallis,
Yammarino, & Feyerherm, 2011). In other words, dyads were char-
acterized as independent from other dyads and the group yet having
interdependence between dyadic partners in those studies.

Individualized leadership was not suggested as an alternative to ALS
or VDL, but rather as an additional perspective on leadership by iden-
tifying a relatively new relational process (i.e., investment-return
cycle), and suggesting two variables (i.e., support for self-worth, sa-
tisfying performance) and their association that operate at the dyad
level (Dansereau et al., 1995). Although individualized leadership re-
ceived empirical support, some questions on contextual factors (e.g.,
antecedents and outcomes of support for self-worth, boundary condi-
tions) have been raised, resulting in calls for additional research to
resolve issues and provide greater clarity to dyadic leadership concepts
(Ferris & Harrell-Cook, 1998; Mumford, 1998).

Leader-member exchange (LMX)
LMX (Graen & Cashman, 1975; Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1995) kept the

central notion of VDL – that leaders develop differentiated relationships
that form in-groups/out-groups – but put more emphasis on the quality
of the exchange relationship that a leader maintains with followers. A
low-quality relationship was characterized as being transactional,
which is close to economic exchange, whereas a high-quality relation-
ship was characterized as having high trust, mutual liking, and respect,
which represents social exchange (Bernerth, Armenakis, Feild, Giles, &
Walker, 2007). After exploring the existence of differentiated re-
lationships depending on the relationship qualities, LMX has evolved to
reflect a cycle of leader-follower relationship development (Graen &
Uhl-Bien, 1995).

After further development of LMX theory (for a review, see
Dulebohn et al., 2012), Bernerth et al. (2007) introduced an additional
perspective and measure (i.e., Leader-Member Social Exchange, LMSX)
that concentrated on the ‘social exchange’ nature of the leader-follower
exchange relationships. In other words, this additional view shifted the
focus of LMX from the quality of the relationship (e.g., affect, respect)
to the quality of the (social) exchange behavior in the relationship.
Colquitt, Baer, Long, and Halvorsen-Ganepola (2014) provided initial
evidence that LMSX captures the social exchange nature of the leader-
follower relationship better than other relationship related measures,
including LMX-7, by examining the face validity of the measures from
undergraduate (mostly not employed) students' viewpoint (with same-
source data) and suggested that LMSX might be more appropriate to use
when studying LMX and the social exchange in relationships.

While LMSX has refocused exploration on the quality of the social
exchange and related behaviors, some issues remain surrounding the
concept of LMX such that the level of LMX theory is unclear. Although
LMX was introduced conceptually as a dyad-level theory, the majority
of LMX studies have been conducted at the individual level (see Dionne
et al., 2014; Gooty et al., 2012; Yammarino et al., 2005). Followers'
perception of LMX quality was mostly measured at the individual level
and has been shown to be both an important predictor of an individual's
cognitive, affective, and behavioral outcomes and a mediating me-
chanism that connects individual or interpersonal relationship char-
acteristics and those individual outcomes (Dulebohn et al., 2012;
Gerstner & Day, 1997; Ilies, Nahrgang, & Morgeson, 2007; Rockstuhl,
Dulebohn, Ang, & Shore, 2012). Measuring LMX at the individual level
can be helpful when examining the cause and effect (antecedents and
outcomes) of an individual's relationship perceptions but may be pro-
blematic when used to represent the dyadic relationship, as one in-
dividual's relationship perception may not be an accurate representa-
tion of the relationship (Gooty & Yammarino, 2016; Krasikova &
LeBreton, 2012). When an individual's LMX quality perception is used
as a proxy for dyadic LMX quality, and inferences are made for a dyadic
phenomenon, theoretical contribution for understanding leader-fol-
lower dyads may be limited.

Several researchers investigated the level at which LMX operates
and showed that, when properly measured and analyzed with both
dyadic partners' perspectives, LMX can be a dyadic phenomenon (Gooty
& Yammarino, 2011; Markham, Yammarino, Murry, & Palanski, 2010;
Schriesheim, Castro, Zhou, & Yammarino, 2001). Although the number
of pure dyad-level LMX studies (i.e., with leader and follower both
reporting about LMX and, for example, an outcome) is far less than
individual-level LMX studies (e.g., follower reports about LMX per-
ception and the leader reports about performance), dyad-level LMX
studies are increasing recently with better measurement and analysis
practices.

Relational leadership
Relational leadership theory (RLT) (Uhl-Bien, 2006; Uhl-Bien &

Ospina, 2012) highlights the importance of the relational process that
enables leadership and considers leadership as a socially constructed
phenomenon (Yammarino, Salas, Serban, Shirreffs, & Shuffler, 2012).
Moreover, the relationship is considered as an outcome that is produced
through the relational process (e.g., social interactions) (Uhl-Bien,
2006). In other words, RLT is a theory that emphasizes relational dy-
namics as an organizing mechanism and views the relationship as an
outcome.

As the major focus of RLT is on understanding the process of re-
lationship development, qualitative research methods (e.g., organiza-
tional discourse analysis) have been suggested as a suitable in-
vestigative approach (Fairhurst & Uhl-Bien, 2012; Uhl-Bien, 2006; Uhl-
Bien & Ospina, 2012). RLT has been further advanced through applying
diverse disciplinary perspectives and contexts (see Uhl-Bien & Ospina,
2012) and mixed methods (e.g., Meinecke, Lehmann-Willenbrock, &
Kauffeld, 2017) to capture, for example, the relational dynamics in

J. Kim, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101306

3



leader-follower dyadic communication patterns.
The focal relationship in RLT, however, is not limited to leader-

follower relationship but includes all possible forms of relationships
within organizations (Uhl-Bien, 2006). In terms of levels, RLT involves
dyads, but goes beyond and includes groups and collectives. Although
RLT does not directly or solely focus on dyadic phenomenon, the the-
ory's relational process orientation can be used as a framework to un-
derstand dyadic relationship development and procedural antecedents
of relational outcomes. In particular, RLT provides insight to investigate
issues such as the factors affecting relationship development, the as-
sociations among factors to build an emerging dyadic relationship, and
patterns of social interactions in the relationships.

Leader-follower congruence
Congruence involves matching two conceptually distinct constructs

and can be presented with different terms such as fit, similarity, match,
or agreement (Edwards, 1994). Leader-follower congruence is one type
of person-environment fit, considering the leader as the environment
for the follower and vice versa (Kristof-Brown et al., 2005). Depending
on the measure, congruence can be categorized into subjective (i.e.,
perceived) and objective (i.e., actual) congruence (Caplan, 1987;
Kristof, 1996). While subjective congruence considers an individual's
(e.g., follower's) belief about whether he/she fits well with the en-
vironment (e.g., leader), objective congruence involves explicit com-
parison of the follower's and the leader's characteristics or perceptions,
measured from both independently (e.g., Cogliser, Schriesheim,
Scandura, & Gardner, 2009; Sin et al., 2009). Needs-supplies fit and
demands-abilities fit (Caplan, 1987; Kristof, 1996) have also been
considered at the dyad level to predict followers' individual outcomes
(e.g., Marstand, Martin, & Epitropaki, 2017).

Leader-follower congruence has gained empirical support in pre-
dicting various individual outcomes. Kristof-Brown et al. (2005)'s meta-
analysis showed that leader-follower fit (e.g., value, goal, personality),
including both subjective and objective fit, is positively related to in-
dividual outcomes such as job satisfaction, supervisor satisfaction, and
LMX. Additionally, relational demography (Tsui & O'Reilly, 1989),
which considers the similarity and dissimilarity of demographic char-
acteristics (e.g., race, gender, education level, job tenure), was pre-
sented as a dyad-level variable that predicts individual outcomes. The
association between (dis)similarity in individual characteristics in
dyads and individual outcomes provides an understanding of how in-
dividuals are influenced by having a better/worse matched partner.
This research framework can be extended by employing dyad-level
outcomes and provide an additional understanding of leader-follower
dyadic relationships.

Summary
Leader-follower dyadic phenomena have been viewed from diverse

theoretical perspectives that fall into the general domain of leadership
or leader-follower relationships. Each theory views the dyadic phe-
nomena from different levels-of-analysis perspectives and captures the
dyadic phenomena differently by focusing on either process or out-
comes. Individualized leadership emphasizes the investment-return
cycle as a key process to build interdependence in the dyad, whereas
RLT focuses on the dynamic nature of the relationship development
process. On the other hand, LMX concentrates on high quality re-
lationship outcomes, and leader-follower congruence considers the
outcomes of (mis)match between two individuals' characteristics. Given
the different foci, each theory provides a foundation for different re-
search questions on leader-follower dyadic phenomena. Moreover, it is
possible that theories other than these five theories could have been
used to examine different aspects of leader-follower dyads.

To understand how much the dyad- and/or relationship-related
theories in leadership have been employed and what other theories
have been used in leader-follower dyads studies since the beginning of
dyads studies to provide a comprehensive overview of the state of

leader-follower dyads research and identify theories that have been
(under)utilized in leader-follower dyads studies, we propose the fol-
lowing research question on the usage of each theory in leader-follower
dyads research.

Research Question 1(RQ1). What is the current usage of dyad the-
ories to explain the leader-follower dyadic phenomenon? Which theories are
used, to what degree, and how are they formulated to account for pure
dyadic phenomenon?

Dyadic research methods

Analyzing dyadic data with appropriate dyadic research methods
and techniques requires specification of the type of dyads involved
(Gooty & Yammarino, 2011; Krasikova & LeBreton, 2012; Tse et al.,
2018). For example, failure to include group membership as a group-
level variable when dyads are embedded in groups could result in in-
accurate examination of dyadic phenomena. Specifically, dyadic data
can be collected from either independent dyads (i.e., one leader and one
follower) or dependent dyads (i.e., one leader and multiple followers in
a group) (see Gooty & Yammarino, 2011). As the importance of con-
sidering data dependencies in dyadic analyses has been emphasized in
previous research (Gooty & Yammarino, 2011; Krasikova & LeBreton,
2012; Tse et al., 2018), we examine whether the type of dyads has been
considered in the leader-follower dyads research by addressing research
question below:

Research Question 2a (RQ2a). Do leader-follower dyad studies focus
on independent or dependent dyads and how is the focus typically justified?

Several specific methods have been suggested for testing theoretical
notions about leader-follower dyads and analyzing data collected from
both dyadic partners (see Gooty & Yammarino, 2011; Krasikova &
LeBreton, 2012; Liden et al., 2016; Yammarino & Gooty, 2017). The
usage of these available methods depends on the research questions,
and certain questions may require the use of more than one of these
primary methods summarized below.

Multilevel modeling
When a research question involves contemporary cross-level effects

(see Yammarino & Gooty, 2019) – such as a direct relationship between
a higher-level independent variable and a lower-level dependent vari-
able, or a moderating effect of a higher-level independent variable on a
lower-level independent-dependent variable relationship – multilevel
(random coefficient) modeling can be implemented through several
software platforms (e.g., Hierarchical Linear Modeling (HLM), R, Stata,
and MPlus). When implementing a dyad-level variable as an in-
dependent variable, both dyadic partners' individual responses need to
be included and aggregated (see Gooty & Yammarino, 2011).

Multilevel modeling can specify the types of dyads that enable re-
searchers to study both independent and dependent dyads in organi-
zations. In addition, multilevel modeling can address research questions
involving (contemporary) cross-level interactions by including higher-
level moderators in the model. Another strength of multilevel modeling
comes from having an individual-level dependent variable; this allows
for the examination of research questions pertaining to the effect of
dyad-level predictors on individual outcomes. When the phenomenon
of interest is a (contemporary) cross-level relationship, then multilevel
modeling is a suitable method to use. However, when the phenomenon
of interest involves a higher-level (e.g., dyad-level) dependent variable,
multilevel modeling might not be applicable.

Polynomial regression
Polynomial regression and response surface methodology (Edwards

& Parry, 1993; Shanock, Baran, Gentry, Pattison, & Heggestad, 2010)
have been introduced as alternatives to difference scores when ex-
amining the effect of similarity, congruence, fit, and/or the match be-
tween two entities or notions. As a dyad involves two individuals,
polynomial regression could be a suitable method for studying the

J. Kim, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101306

4



effects of convergence and divergence of two individuals' perceptions
(Liden et al., 2016) or the effects of similarity and dissimilarity of two
individuals' characteristics on individual outcomes (e.g., Zhang, Wang,
& Shi, 2012). After fitting the polynomial regression model, regression
coefficients, covariances, and standard errors are used to estimate the
response surface which visually shows the effects of convergence and
divergence (Shanock et al., 2010). By examining the slope and curva-
ture of the congruence and incongruence lines of the estimated re-
sponse surface, research questions on the similarity, congruence, fit, or
match can be investigated. In addition, nonindependence of dyads can
be considered by employing cross-level polynomial regression (Jansen
& Kristof-Brown, 2005).

Although polynomial regression is a useful tool to study the effect of
congruence and/or divergence of the predictor on individual outcomes,
this method cannot be directly implemented when examining dyad-
level outcomes. The additional step of aggregating the two individuals'
outcomes to generate a dyad-level variable is necessary to study dyadic
phenomenon.

Within and Between Analysis (WABA)
WABA is useful for testing the level of analysis of variables (WABA

I), the relationship between the variables (WABA II), and traditional
cross-level effects (Dansereau et al., 1984; Gooty & Yammarino, 2011;
Schriesheim et al., 2001; Yammarino & Dubinsky, 1992; Yammarino &
Gooty, 2019). Contrary to other dyadic data analysis methods that
allow dependent variables to only be at the individual level, WABA can
be used when the dependent variable is a dyad-level variable. WABA
uses ANOVA and correlation-based procedures to make inferences
about the level(s) of variables and relationships between the variables
and whether there are traditional cross-level effects (Dansereau et al.,
1984; Yammarino, 1998; Yammarino & Gooty, 2017, 2019).

WABA is a tool to test the theoretically driven level of variables and
relationships of interest. The strength of WABA is that it can consider
different types of dyads (i.e., independent, dependent), test multi-level
effects (e.g., dyad-level predictor – dyad-level outcomes), and employ
dyad-level outcomes in the model. WABA can be challenging when the
phenomenon of interest is complex, involving multiple mediators and
moderators simultaneously in analyses (see Gooty & Yammarino, 2011;
Yammarino & Gooty, 2017), but advanced WABA procedures can be
employed to overcome this limitation (see Dansereau et al., 1984;
Schriesheim, 1995; Yammarino, 1998).

Actor-Partner Interdependence Model (APIM)/One with Many (OWM)
model

APIM and OWM models were initially suggested for dyadic analyses
of interpersonal and romantic relationships (Kenny, Kashy, & Cook,
2006). The use of each model depends on whether the dyads are in-
dependent (i.e., APIM) or dependent (i.e., OWM) (Kenny et al., 2006;
Krasikova & LeBreton, 2012). APIM requires both independent and
dependent variables to be collected from both dyadic partners and
could address research questions on how each dyadic partners' char-
acteristics influence himself/herself and the dyadic partner (i.e., mutual
influence) and can examine the relative strength of each effect
(Krasikova & LeBreton, 2012). OWM can be employed for dependent

dyads that involve multiple relationships of an individual. OWM en-
compasses the actor effect, partner effect, and relationship effect and
allows researchers to examine whether the reciprocity between the
actor and partner are generalized among or unique to dyads (Krasikova
& LeBreton, 2012).

APIM/OWM, depending on the type of dyads being studied, can
simultaneously investigate interpersonal and intrapersonal effects. The
independent and dependent variables should both be matched data
(i.e., obtained from both actor and partner) from the dyad. When
running the model, the independent variable and dependent variable
are not aggregated to one value that represents the dyads, but each
individual's response is used separately. APIM/OWM can examine how
a dyad member can impact his/her relationship partner, but unique
characteristics of the dyad or the effect of the combination of two in-
dividuals' characteristics cannot be examined through this method.

Summary
Various methods that have different foci and involve different levels

of variables have been suggested for dyadic data analysis (see Table 1).
Based on the research questions or hypotheses, methods could be used
alone, jointly, or sequentially (see Yammarino & Gooty, 2019).

To understand how these four dyadic data analysis methods have
been employed and explore what other methods have been used to
study leader-follower dyads, our review results will be summarized by
focusing on the below research question:

Research Question 2b (RQ2b). What dyadic research methods have
been used, and to what degree, in leader-follower dyad studies? How are
they formulated and used to account for pure dyads?

Antecedents and outcomes of leader-follower dyads

Studies on leader-follower relationships have been scattered in
terms of theoretical basis and levels of analysis (e.g., individual level
and dyad level). For instance, currently what is known about leader-
follower exchange relationships is mainly based on individual-level
studies (e.g., individual LMX perceptions) such that several meta-ana-
lyses were conducted to show the antecedents, consequences, and
correlates of individual-level LMX perceptions (Dulebohn et al., 2012;
Dulebohn, Wu, & Liao, 2017; Gerstner & Day, 1997), but dyad-level
LMX has received relatively little attention in the reviews which led to
limited understanding of dyadic exchange relationships. In terms of
dyad-level studies, leader-follower congruence studies were conducted
at the dyad level and predicted the impact of dyad characteristics (e.g.,
relational demography, personality similarity) on diverse individual
outcomes (e.g., Tsui & O'Reilly, 1989; Zhang et al., 2012). In-
dividualized leadership studies were also conducted at the dyad level
by examining the relationship between support for self-worth and sa-
tisfying performance, both measured at the dyad level (Dansereau et al.,
1995).

Given the possibility of examining diverse levels of analysis in
leader-follower dyads studies, it would be beneficial to review and
summarize the pure leader-follower dyads studies. Accordingly, we re-
view studies that aligned the levels of theory, measurement, and ana-
lysis at the dyad level (i.e., interested in dyadic phenomenon, collected

Table 1
Summary of dyadic research methods.

Method Objective/research question Dependent/independent
dyad

Level: independent
variable

Level: dependent
variable

Multilevel modeling Cross-level effects (contemporary) Both Dyad Individual
Polynomial regression Effect of leader-follower congruence Both Dyad Individual
WABA Level of variable (WABA I), level of relationship (multi-level effects)

(WABA II), cross-level effects (traditional)
Both Dyad Dyad

APIM/OWM Mutual influence APIM: Independent
OWM: Dependent

Dyad Individual

J. Kim, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101306

5



matched data from both dyadic partners on at least one variable, and
analyzed with dyadic research methods) to understand the antecedents
and consequences of pure leader-follower dyadic phenomena.

To capture the current state of leader-follower dyads research, there
is value in generating a nomological network (Cronbach & Meehl,
1955) that integrates previous research findings. In particular, a no-
mological network will show the unique characteristics of leader-fol-
lower dyads, and antecedents and consequences of those leader-fol-
lower dyads characteristics. As a result, the nomological network
generated in this review will depict what we currently know about
leader-follower dyads. Therefore, we propose the research question
below:

Research Question 3 (RQ3). What does the nomological network of
leader-follower dyads look like? What are the key antecedents and con-
sequences for leader-follower dyads, and are these dyadic level-focused or
individual differences-focused precursors and consequences?

In addition, the multidimensionality of leader-follower dyadic
phenomenon could be considered as different dimensions capturing
different aspects/characteristics of the dyad. Cognition, affect, and
behavior dimensions have been widely used when studying groups/
teams (e.g., Kozlowski & Ilgen, 2006), and these dimensions are ap-
plicable to dyads as a dyad is a unique/special form of a group. Dyads
can have shared perceptions, affective states, and behavioral patterns,
meaning that outcomes of dyadic interaction can be categorized into
these dimensions.

For example, the LMX construct has been known to be multi-
dimensional as different measures capture different aspects of the
dyadic exchange relationship (Liden, Wu, Cao, & Wayne, 2016;
Schriesheim, Castro, & Cogliser, 1999). LMX-7 (Graen & Uhl-Bien,
1995) appears to capture the cognitive aspect of a relationship by
asking how the working relationship is perceived. LMX-MDM (Liden &
Maslyn, 1998) measures affect, loyalty, contribution, and professional
respect that appear to be a mix of affective, cognitive, and behavioral
aspects of the relationship. Moreover, LMSX (Bernerth et al., 2007)
focuses on the (social) exchanging behavior that takes place within the
dyad. As such, for LMX and other dyadic phenomena, different mea-
sures capturing different aspects of leader-follower relationships raises
the possibility of the multidimensional nature of dyadic phenomena. In
addition, given that outcomes of leader-follower relationships can be
categorized as affect, behavior, or cognition (Dulebohn et al., 2012;
Gerstner & Day, 1997; Ilies et al., 2007; Rockstuhl et al., 2012), it would
be worth examining the dimensions of the outcomes of dyads or dyadic
relationships as well. Therefore, we propose:

Research Question 4 (RQ4). What is the dimensionality (i.e., affec-
tive, behavioral, and cognitive) of variables in leader-follower dyads studies?

Literature review method

To explore the above research questions and conduct a compre-
hensive review of leader-follower dyads research, studies focusing on
the leader-follower dyads were identified through abstract keyword
searches from web-based databases (Business Source Ultimate,
PsychINFO, PsychARTICLES). The search, as in prior studies, was
constrained to high-quality peer-reviewed journals in management,
applied psychology, and leadership published until August 2017. From
the Clarivate Analytics Web of Science 2016 impact factor list (category:
Management; Psychology, Applied), we filtered journals with impact
factor> 2.0 and sorted journals that publish empirical work on micro
organizational behavior phenomena. Journal search based on the im-
pact factor yielded 24 journals. In addition to these 24 journals, we
included two journals (i.e., Group & Organization Management; Journal
of Leadership & Organization Studies) in our review that have been in-
cluded in previous reviews on leadership (Fischer, Dietz, & Antonakis,
2017; Gooty et al., 2012). A full list of journals and the number of
articles included in the current review by journal is presented in
Table 2.

Keywords used in the search were based on leader-follower dyad
theories (i.e., ‘vertical dyad linkage’, ‘individualized leadership’,
‘leader-member exchange’/‘LMX’, ‘relational leadership’). For LMX, the
keyword ‘dyad*’ was combined to specify the level because LMX has
been theoretically suggested (Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1995) and empirically
tested at multiple levels and not limited to the dyad level (Gooty et al.,
2012). We conducted a search with broader keyword phrases ‘leader* &
dyad*’, ‘superior* & dyad*’, ‘supervisor* & dyad*’, and ‘manager* &
dyad*’ to search articles that focused on leader-follower congruence, as
different terms are used to represent congruence (e.g., fit, similarity,
congruence, agreement), and to capture articles that are based on
theories other than five initial theories discussed above.

As empirical studies on leader-follower dyads are the focus of this
review, only quantitative studies on leader-follower dyads in workplace
were included. Specifically, for quantitative studies on leader-follower
dyads, only studies that measured at least one variable from both
members of the dyad were included. Conceptual work, qualitative
studies, meta-analyses, literature reviews, lab experiments, student
samples studies, and scale development studies were excluded, as they
did not fit our inclusion criteria to explore our research questions.

Initial keyword searches from the journals yielded 435 articles.
Inclusion criteria were applied to screen the initial searched articles.
Abstracts and method sections of all articles were examined to de-
termine the final set of articles to be coded (see Fig. 1 for article
screening process). After the screening, 356 out of 435 articles were
excluded. These 356 articles did not meet the inclusion criteria because
they were either (a) conceptual (24 articles), (b) meta-analysis/litera-
ture review (12 articles), (c) scale development/construct validation
(four articles), (d) qualitative studies (six articles), (e) empirical studies
not specifically focused on leader-follower dyads (71 articles), (f) lab
experiments/simulation (13 articles), (g) student sample studies (seven
articles), (h) individual-level studies on leader-follower dyads (i.e., all
variables were collected at the individual level) (194 articles), or (i)
empirical studies that focused on leader-follower dyads and collected
dyadic data but did not match dyadic data and used the data for se-
parate individual-level analyses only (25 articles). Thus, 79 articles
remained to be coded.

Coding process

Coder training

Four coders with doctoral-level training in organizational behavior
and leadership conducted the coding. All coders had knowledge about
dyads and levels of analysis issues and had experience coding articles

Table 2
Article counts by journals.

Journal Count

Academy of Management Journal 13
Administrative Science Quarterly 1
European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology 1
Group & Organization Management 8
Human Relations 4
Journal of Applied Psychology 6
Journal of Business and Psychology 1
Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies 4
Journal of Management 2
Journal of Management Studies 1
Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology 9
Journal of Organizational Behavior 6
Journal of Vocational Behavior 2
Organization Science 2
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 1
Personnel Psychology 2
The Leadership Quarterly 16
Total 79

J. Kim, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101306

6



based on a levels of analysis framework. To ensure accurate coding, all
coders received extensive training to familiarize themselves with the
coding scheme and process. The training was conducted in two phases.
In the first phase, coders coded ten articles individually and met to
compare the results. If any discrepancies were found, coders discussed
differences to reach an agreement and a consensus code. In the second
practice session, four coders were split into two pairs. After individually
coding another 10 articles, coders met their partner to discuss the
coding results and reach an agreement. After discussing within each
pair, all coders met to review results that were agreed upon within the
pairs. From this discussion, coders were able to cross-check the results
between coding pairs. After the two complete practice sessions, all
coders coded all 79 articles by following the process of coding in-
dependently, discussing the results with a partner, and checking the
results with the other pair.

Coding scheme

Descriptive information about the articles such as authors, journal,
and year of publication were recorded. All variables in the studies were
recorded and the types of variables and relationships between the
variables were specified. This information was used to answer RQ3 on

the nomological network of leader-follower dyads. The theoretical basis
of the studies, the type of dyads from which the study collected data,
and the analytic methods were coded to answer RQ1, RQ2a, and RQ2b,
respectively. For studies that used theories and methods other than the
five theories and four primary methods discussed above, coders used an
‘other’ code and noted the name of the other theories and methods. In
addition, studies that used multiple theories or methods were given
multiple codes. To answer RQ4, all variables included in the hypotheses
involving dyadic variables were considered, and levels and dimensions
(i.e., affect, behavior, cognition, and demographics) of these variables
were coded. For example, when a variable was measured from both the
leader's and follower's perspectives and combined, the level of the
variable was coded as ‘dyad’. On the other hand, when the variable was
measured from either leader or follower, but not both, the level of the
variable was coded as ‘individual’. Dimensions of each variable were
coded as affect, behavior, cognition, or demographics based on the
conceptualization.

Results

Seventy-nine articles included in the current review can be sum-
marized by published years as shown in Fig. 2. Since 1971, the number

Fig. 1. Article screening process based on inclusion criteria.

J. Kim, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101306

7



of leader-follower dyads studies that include a dyad-level variable has
been increasing continuously.

RQ 1 results

A summary of leader-follower dyad articles by theory is presented in
Table 3. Forty-six articles used one of the five theories reviewed above
(presented on the diagonal of Theory Code 1 to 5 in Table 3), six articles
used one or multiple other theories (presented on the diagonal of
Theory Code 6), and 27 articles used either a combination of one of the
five theories and other theories or a combination of two of the five
theories to explain the phenomenon of interest (presented on the off-
diagonal of Table 3). Among the 46 articles that used one theory,
leader-follower congruence (35 articles) was the most used theory for
leader-follower dyad studies, followed by LMX (five articles), in-
dividualized leadership (three articles), and VDL (three articles).

Studies on leader-follower congruence mainly focused on in-
vestigating the effect of similarity/dissimilarity of leader-follower
characteristics (e.g., demographics, individual characteristics) (e.g.,
Pearce & Xu, 2012; Tsui & O'Reilly, 1989) or a leader's and a follower's
perceptions (e.g., Greene, 1972; Wexley & Pulakos, 1983). Specifically,
among the 35 articles, 19 articles (54%) studied the effects of demo-
graphic similarity. Studies on LMX examined the antecedents or con-
sequences of dyadic LMX (e.g., Olsson, Hemlin, & Pousette, 2012;
Schriesheim et al., 2001). Studies on individualized leadership con-
centrated on testing the levels of support for self-worth and satisfying
performance (e.g., Keller & Dansereau, 1995). VDL studies investigated
an antecedent of VDL quality (Snyder & Bruning, 1985) and con-
sequences of negotiation latitude (Kozlowski & Doherty, 1989; Rosse &
Kraut, 1983).

Six articles that were based on other theories employed transfor-
mational leadership, contingent reward leadership, relational control
approach, or social exchange theory. Regarding transformational

leadership and contingent reward leadership, the level of the theory
and the level of the relationship between leadership behavior and
outcomes were investigated (e.g., Yammarino, Dubinsky, Comer, &
Jolson, 1997). Relational control approach was used to examine the
dyadic conversation pattern (Courtright, Fairhurst, & Rogers, 1989),
and social exchange theory was applied to develop an idea on the effect
of a leader and a follower's commitment interaction on follower's job
performance (Landry & Vandenberghe, 2012).

Regarding the 27 articles that applied two theories, 20 articles were
related to both leader-follower congruence and LMX and examined the
effect of a leader's and a follower's individual differences congruence on
individual LMX perceptions (e.g., Byza, Schuh, Dörr, Spörrle, & Maier,
2017; Tsai et al., 2017) or the effect of LMX agreement on a follower's
outcomes (e.g., Matta et al., 2015). Four articles combined leader-fol-
lower congruence and other theories (e.g., transformational leadership,
guanxi), two articles used LMX and other theories (e.g., transforma-
tional leadership, resource dependence theory), and one article was
based on VDL and individualized leadership.

Summary
The results showed that the majority of the studies concentrated on

leader-follower congruence or LMX and predicted outcomes of the
leader-follower relationship. In contrast, studies that used process-or-
iented theories, such as individualized leadership and relational lea-
dership theory, were relatively limited. Interestingly, several other
theories such as transformational leadership and contingent reward
leadership were applied to study leader-follower dyadic phenomenon.

RQ 2a results

The type of dyads assessed or used in each study is summarized in
Table 4. Studies were coded as operationalizing the dyads as in-
dependent dyads when the number of leaders and followers in the
sample were identical, and as dependent dyads when dyad data were
collected from groups/teams and the number of leaders and followers
were different (i.e., a leader had multiple followers). For dependent
dyads studies, we coded whether the nested nature of the data was
considered in the analyses. Studies that did not report the number of
both leaders and followers were coded as not specifying the type of
dyads.

Of 79 articles, 19 articles specified that dyadic data were collected
from independent dyads, 41 articles were based on data collected from
dependent dyads, 17 articles (22%) did not specify the type of dyads
used in the study, and two articles conducted multiple studies with
different operationalizations. For example, Guarana and Barnes (2017)
collected data from independent dyads for the first study and from
dependent dyads for the second study; and Paustian-Underdahl, King,
Rogelberg, Kulich, and Gentry (2017) did not provide adequate in-
formation to discern the type of dyads in one study and collected de-
pendent dyad data in the other study. Regarding the 43 articles that
used data from dependent dyads, including two articles that

Fig. 2. Included leader-follower dyad studies by years.

Table 3
Summary of leader-follower dyad studies: theory.

Theory code 1 2 3 4 5 6 Total

1 3 1 4
2 1 3 4
3 5 20 2 27
4 0 0
5 20 35 4 59
6 2 4 6 12
Total 4 4 27 0 59 12 106

Note. 1=VDL, 2= Individualized leadership, 3= LMX, 4=Relational lea-
dership, 5= Leader-follower congruence, and 6=Other. Number of articles
with one theory is presented on the diagonal and number of articles using
multiple theories is presented in the cells of the code combinations. Twenty-
seven articles using multiple theories (located off-diagonal) have been counted
twice, leading to a total of 106 (=79+27).

Table 4
Summary of leader-follower dyad studies: type of dyads.

Operationalized as Count Conducted test for levelsa (in case of dependent
dyads)

Independent dyads 19
Dependent dyads 41 Yes: 25

No: 16
Not specified 17
Multiple 2 Yes: 2
Total 79

Note.
a Yes: considered nesting of dyads in analysis; No: did not consider nesting of

dyads in analysis.

J. Kim, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101306

8



operationalized the dyads differently across studies, 27 articles (63%)
considered the nesting of dyads within groups or teams.

The 27 articles used different methods to take the group-level effects
into consideration. WABA was used to directly test whether the levels of
the relationship of interest were at the dyad or group level (e.g.,
Yammarino & Dubinsky, 1994). Some studies used aggregation tests
(i.e., ICC) to either eliminate the possibility of group-level effect (e.g.,
Tsai et al., 2017) or aggregate a group-level variable (e.g., Colbert,
Kristof-Brown, Bradley, & Barrick, 2008). In the case of studies em-
ploying multilevel modeling, variables related to leaders were included
as group-level variables to either control the nesting of dyads under a
common leader or explain group-level effects (e.g., Guarana & Barnes,
2017; Kant, Skogstad, Torsheim, & Einarsen, 2013).

Summary
As independent dyads (i.e., one leader and one follower) and de-

pendent dyads (i.e., one leader and multiple followers) are conceptually
distinct, and have the potential to involve different levels of analysis
(Gooty & Yammarino, 2011), the type of dyads included in the study
needs to be specified and the requisite proper methodological attention
should be given to the specified dyadic type (Tse et al., 2018). Although
most studies discussed the type of dyads, some studies failed to specify
this explicitly. Moreover, among the studies that collected data from
dependent dyads, approximately one third of the studies did not con-
sider the nesting of dyads within a group. The results suggest room for
improvement in specifying the type of dyads and implementing meth-
odological rigor when studying dependent dyads.

RQ 2b results

A summary of leader-follower dyad articles by method is shown in
Table 5. Twenty-six articles used one of the four dyadic research
methods (i.e., multilevel modeling, polynomial regression/response
surface methodology, WABA, APIM/OWM) reviewed above (presented
on the diagonal of Method Code 1 to 4 in Table 5), eight articles used
either a combination of one of the four methods and other methods or a
combination of two of the four methods (presented on the off-diagonal
of Table 5), and 45 articles used other methods (presented on the di-
agonal of Method Code 5 in Table 5).

Among the 26 articles that used one of the four methods, multilevel
modeling and WABA (nine articles each) were the most used method,
followed by polynomial regression (seven articles), and APIM/OWM
(one article). Multilevel modeling was used to consider both dyad-level
effects and group-level effects, such as group phenomenon (e.g., Chun,
Cho, & Sosik, 2016) or leader-specific effects in groups (e.g., Triana,
Richard, & Yücel, 2017). WABA was employed to test whether the
variables and associations of interest operated at the dyad level (e.g.,
Markham, Markham, & Smith, 2015). Polynomial regression was im-
plemented in studies that focused on the effect of congruence and

incongruence of a leader's and a follower's characteristics/perceptions
(e.g., Matta et al., 2015).

Regarding the eight articles that used at least one of the four re-
viewed methods and another method, two articles that used multilevel
modeling conducted WABA as an additional test for levels of the phe-
nomenon of interest (Douglas, 2012; Gooty & Yammarino, 2016), one
article that conducted structural equation modeling used WABA to
justify aggregation of the variable of interest (Clarke & Mahadi, 2017),
two articles that employed WABA as a primary method used additional
methods such as structural equation modeling (Dansereau et al., 1995)
and correlations (Keller & Dansereau, 1995), two articles that applied
polynomial regression used either multilevel modeling to eliminate the
possibility of group-level effects when using dependent dyad data (Tsai
et al., 2017) or structural equation modeling for mediation tests
(Colbert et al., 2008), and one article that had two studies employed
regression and multilevel regression for each study (Paustian-
Underdahl et al., 2017).

Other methods used in the 45 articles were multiple linear regres-
sion (21 articles), ANOVA/MANOVA (10 articles), structural equation
modeling/path analysis (five articles), correlation (four articles), a mix
of these methods (e.g., correlation and regression, ANOVA and re-
gression) (three articles), Grizzle, Starmer, and Koch (GSK) approach
(one article) (Courtright et al., 1989), and Simon-Blalock technique
(one article) (Greene & Organ, 1973). Studies using multiple linear
regression used difference scores to represent dyad characteristics (e.g.,
Tsui & O'Reilly, 1989), and studies using ANOVA/MANOVA employed
categories of dyads to examine the difference in the outcomes of in-
terest (e.g., Sherman, Kennedy, Woodard, & McComb, 2012).

Summary
Less than a half of the articles (34 out of 79 articles) used at least

one of the methods reviewed here, and the rest of the articles used other
methods such as multiple regression and ANOVA/MANOVA. Among
the four reviewed dyadic research methods, when used either sepa-
rately or in some combination, WABA was the most utilized method and
APIM/OWM (Kenny et al., 2006) was the least utilized method. The low
usage of APIM/OWM may be due to its relatively recent introduction
compared to the other methods (i.e., multilevel modeling, WABA,
polynomial regression). Given that APIM/OWM can explain various
research questions about dyads (for sample research questions, see
Krasikova & LeBreton, 2012; Tse et al., 2018), more attention is needed
to this method.

RQ 3 results

In total, 224 hypotheses that included at least one dyad-level vari-
able were coded and 132 hypotheses received empirical support. Based
on the supported hypotheses for direct and indirect effects, we gener-
ated a nomological network of leader-follower dyads research as shown
in Figs. 3, 4, and 5.

Three clusters emerged in the nomological network and each cluster
included different set of theories. The first cluster (Fig. 3) included core
variables of VDL (i.e., negotiation latitude), LMX, and leader-follower
congruence; the second cluster (Fig. 4) was based on VDL and in-
dividualized leadership (i.e., support for self-worth, satisfying perfor-
mance); and the third cluster (Fig. 5) was composed of variables studied
using other leadership theories (e.g., transformational leadership,
contingent reward leadership).

In Fig. 3, leader-follower (in)congruence was central, as it predicted
numerous individual-level, both leader-related and follower-related,
outcomes. Leader-follower (in)congruence variables were further cate-
gorized as demographics/individual differences (e.g., race, gender,
personality, competence), cognition- (e.g., relational schema, role per-
ceptions), affect- (e.g., anger, affectivity), and behavior- (e.g., conflict
resolution strategy) based variables. Among the four categories, affect-
and behavior-based variables were less studied compared to

Table 5
Summary of leader-follower dyad studies: method.

Method code 1 2 3 4 5 Total

1 9 1 2 1 13
2 1 7 1 9
3 2 9 3 14
4 1 1
5 1 1 3 45 50
Total 13 9 14 1 50 87

Note. 1=Multilevel modeling, 2= Polynomial regression/response surface
methodology, 3=WABA, 4=APIM/OWM, and 5=Other. Number of articles
with one method is presented on the diagonal and number of articles using
multiple methods is presented in the cells of the code combinations. Eight ar-
ticles using multiple methods (located off-diagonal) have been counted twice,
leading to a total of 87 (=79+8).

J. Kim, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101306

9



demographics/individual differences-based variables and cognition-
based variables. While demographics/individual differences-based
variables and cognition-based variables had either direct or indirect
effects, affect-based variables only had direct effects on outcomes (e.g.,
individual-level LMX, in-role behavior). Several mediators were iden-
tified for the relationship between leader-follower congruence and
follower-related individual-level outcomes (e.g., in-role behavior, extra-
role behavior, job satisfaction, trust, commitment) and follower-rated
LMX was one of the mediators.

Regarding LMX at the dyad level, two different approaches emerged
in the nomological network. The first approach, which was examining
the effect of LMX agreement (i.e., congruence) between a leader and a
follower (e.g., Markham et al., 2010; Matta et al., 2015; Sherman et al.,
2012), appeared in the first cluster (Fig. 3). As this approach reflects the
congruence between a leader's and a follower's perception, it was ca-
tegorized under cognition-based leader-follower congruence. LMX

agreement predicted perceived performance at the dyad level, a follo-
wer's work engagement, extra-role behavior, and turnover intention.

The second approach to study LMX at the dyad level, which was
generating a dyad-level LMX score as an aggregate of leader-rated and
follower-rated LMX, appeared in the third cluster (Fig. 5). This ag-
gregated LMX score was used to mediate the effect of individual-fo-
cused transformational leadership occurring at the dyad level and fol-
lower's in-role and extra-role behavior (Chun et al., 2016) and the
relationship between the leader's emotional intelligence and follower-
related outcomes such as psychological well-being and turnover in-
tention (Clarke & Mahadi, 2017).

Fig. 4 was formulated around VDL and individualized leadership.
Different dyad-level variables were present and the relationships among
the variables were either causal or based on covariations (Keller &
Dansereau, 1995; Markham et al., 2015; Yammarino & Dubinsky,
1992).

Fig. 3. Note: (I): individual level; (D): dyad level; Constructs/Variables in five leader-follower dyads theories are shaded.
Nomological network of leader-follower dyads research – cluster 1 (VDL, LMX, leader-follower congruence).

Fig. 4. Note. (I): individual level; (D): dyad level; Constructs/Variables in five leader-follower dyads theories are shaded.
Nomological network of leader-follower dyads research – cluster 2 (VDL, individualized leadership).

J. Kim, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101306

10



As shown in Fig. 5, transformational leadership and contingent re-
ward leadership were also studied at the dyad level. Transformational
leadership was an antecedent of dyad-level LMX, dyad-level perfor-
mance, and shared perception of subordinate commitment at the dyad-
level (Chun et al., 2016; Yammarino et al., 1997). Dyad-level con-
tingent reward leadership predicted a follower's outcomes such as job
satisfaction, extra-role performance, and in-role performance (Chun,
Yammarino, Dionne, Sosik, & Moon, 2009). In addition, contingent
reward leadership was also related to dyad-level performance and
shared perception of subordinate commitment at the dyad level
(Yammarino et al., 1997).

Summary
The nomological network included three clusters. The first cluster

was built based on leader-follower congruence and LMX. The second
cluster was formulated with variables mainly studied from an in-
dividualized leadership standpoint and included multiple dyad-level
variables (e.g., negotiation latitude, support for self-worth, satisfying
performance). The third cluster included other theories studied at the
dyad-level (i.e., transformational leadership, contingent reward lea-
dership). Most of the outcomes in the first cluster were individual-level
outcomes such as performance, job satisfaction, and turnover intention.
Among the studies on leader-follower congruence, most of the studies
focused on a leader's and a follower's individual differences that were
manifested before the dyadic relationship began (e.g., demographics,
personality).

In the nomological network, LMX has been employed more as an
individual-level variable than a dyad-level variable. Only two ante-
cedents of dyad-level LMX were identified and outcomes of dyad-level
LMX were all individual-level outcomes. In line with Gooty et al.
(2012)'s review on levels issue in LMX research, despite LMX being one
of the most studied leader-follower dyadic phenomena, relatively little
is known about dyad-level LMX.

RQ 4 results

Variables investigated in leader-follower dyads studies can be ca-
tegorized into either variables that represent characteristics of dyads
(i.e., dyad-level variables) or outcome variables operating at levels
other than dyad level. A list of dyad-level variables and dimensions of
each variable is presented in Table 6, and a list of outcome variables
and dimension of each variable is summarized in Table 7. Dimensions

were determined based on the conceptualization of each variable and
coded as affect, behavior, cognition, or demographics.

In total, 50 dyad-level variables were identified. Among the iden-
tified variables, 44 variables were used as one type of variable with 25
variables as an independent variable, 7 variables as a moderator, one
variable as a mediator, and 11 variables as a dependent variable. Six
variables were used as multiple types of variables and, among them,
three variables were used as both an independent variable and a de-
pendent variable.

Regarding the dimensions of the variables, 34 out of 50 were based
on cognition. The majority of cognition-based variables were related to
(dis)similarity or (in)congruence between two individuals' character-
istics (e.g., competence, growth-need strength, social cynicism, rela-
tional schema, implicit leadership theory) or perceptions of particular
target such as relationship quality (i.e., LMX), role, or performance
rating. Seventeen variables were conceptually related to behavior oc-
curring within dyads such as attention, building and mending re-
lationship, leadership behavior, support for self-worth, and perfor-
mance (i.e., considering both a subordinate's performance and a
supervisor's effectiveness). Of the 10 variables categorized as affect
variables, except (dis)similarity or (in)congruence of anger, emotional
irritation, and emotional intelligence between a leader and a follower,
all variables were conceptually a mix of the affective aspect and cog-
nitive aspect such as LMX, satisfaction, and commitment. Four variables
were identified as capturing relatively objective characteristics such as
demographics (e.g., race, gender, education level), dyadic tenure, re-
lationship type, and guanxi as a former relationship type between a
leader and a follower.

Individual-level outcomes studied in leader-follower dyads studies
(Table 7) were categorized into follower-related outcomes and leader-
related outcomes. Forty-two variables were identified as follower-re-
lated outcomes. In terms of the conceptual dimensions of the follower-
related outcomes, cognition (27 variables) was the most studied aspect,
followed by behavior (13 variables) and affect (nine variables). Among
the follower-related outcomes, nine variables (e.g., organizational
commitment, job satisfaction, trust) were considered to be capturing
multiple aspects (e.g., affect and cognition, behavior and cognition).

Regarding leader-related outcomes, 18 variables were found and
behavior (12 variables) was the most studied dimension, followed by
affect (six variables) and cognition (five variables). Among the leader-
related outcomes, four variables (e.g., managerial support, leader ef-
fectiveness) were a mix of multiple dimensions (e.g., affect and

Fig. 5. Note. (I): individual level; (D): dyad level; (G): group level; Constructs/Variables in five leader-follower dyadstheories are shaded.
Nomological network of leader-follower dyads research – cluster 3 (other theories).

J. Kim, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101306

11



cognition, affect and behavior, mix of all three dimensions).

Summary
In terms of dyad-level variables, a small number of variables were

identified as outcome variables and most of the variables were either
independent variables or moderators. In other words, few variables
have been investigated as purely dyadic outcomes. In addition, di-
mensions of dyad-level variables were mostly cognitions.

With regard to outcomes of leader-follower dyads, all variables were
at the individual level and mostly related to followers. Again, outcomes
were also heavily focused on cognitive aspects. These results guide
future research to further explore and investigate more dyad-level
outcomes and consider dimensions other than cognitions.

Discussion

By focusing on the dyad level in the realm of leadership and going
beyond extant reviews on leader-follower dyads (e.g., Krasikova &
LeBreton, 2012; Liden et al., 2016), LMX research (e.g., Gooty et al.,
2012; Tse et al., 2018), and LMX agreement (e.g., Sin et al., 2009), the
current review broadly examined empirical findings in leader-follower
dyads research with consideration of both theories and methods em-
ployed in leader-follower dyads studies. Given our focus on pure dyads
studies, we excluded individual-level relationship perceptions studies
(e.g., all variables are at the individual level). Articles that met the
inclusion criteria were coded to address research questions on the
theoretical basis of each study, the usage of dyadic research methods,
the nomological network of leader-follower dyadic phenomena, and the

Table 6
Dimensions of dyad-level variables used in leader-follower dyads research.

Typea Variable Dimensions

Affect Behavior Cognition Demographics

IV Attention X
IV Building and mending relationship X X
IV Contingent reward leadership X
IV, MOD (In)congruence – demographics X
IV (In)congruence – affective commitment X X
IV (In)congruence – anger X
IV (In)congruence – cognitive moral development X
IV (In)congruence – commitment - other X X
IV (In)congruence – communication style X X
IV (In)congruence – competence X
IV (In)congruence – emotional intelligence X
IV (In)congruence – growth-need strength X
IV (In)congruence – political skills X
IV (In)congruence – power X
IV (In)congruence – personality X X X
IV (In)congruence – regulatory focus X
IV (In)congruence – social cynicism X
IV (In)congruence – relational schema X
IV (In)congruence – implicit leadership theory X
IV, MOD, DV (In)congruence – LMX perception X X X
IV (In)congruence – attribution conflict X
IV, MED, DV (In)congruence – role, job content perception X
IV, DV (In)congruence – other perception X
IV Guanxi X
IV, MOD Interaction/relationship type X
IV Interpersonal problems X X
IV Job latitude X
IV Job congruence X
IV, MED LMX X X
IV Support for self-worth X X
IV Transformational leadership X
MED (In)congruence – goal importance X
MOD (In)congruence – emotional irritation X
MOD (In)congruence – meaning of work X
MOD (In)congruence – self-efficacy X
MOD (In)congruence – individual characteristics X
MOD Dyadic tenure X
MOD Role clarity X
MOD Role conflict X
DV Commitment X X
DV Conflict (in conversations) X
DV Conflict resolution strategy X
DV Discussion (in conversations) X
DV Dyadic problems X
DV (In)congruence – performance ratings X
DV Influence tactics X
DV Performance X X
DV Satisfaction X X
DV Satisfying performance X X
DV Subordinate's extra effort X
Total 50 10 17 34 4

Note.
a IV: independent variable; MED: mediator; MOD: moderator; DV: dependent variable. All are dyad-level (and not individual-level) variables.

J. Kim, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101306

12



dimensionality of variables covered in dyads research.
Our review results indicate that little has been uncovered in terms of

pure dyadic phenomena between leaders and followers. In other words,
leader-follower dyads research field has a potential to expand widely in
the future. By looking at the nomological network generated and the
summary on the usage of theories on leader-follower dyads from this
review, researchers will be able to identify areas that need future in-
vestigation for replication and to expand the nomological network to
enhance our knowledge of dyadic phenomena. Moreover, researchers
can try replicating the findings of leader-follower dyadic phenomena
investigated with early methods (e.g., multiple regression; ANOVA/
MANOVA) by employing more contemporary methods suggested for
dyadic research, when applicable.

In general, to expand our understanding of leader-follower dyads,
future studies on leader-follower dyads should pay closer attention to
the levels of theory, measurement, analysis, and inference, as suggested
by other reviews on levels of analysis issues in leadership research (e.g.,
Dionne et al., 2014; Gooty et al., 2012; Yammarino et al., 2005). Ad-
ditionally, future research can align the levels issues at the dyad level
by addressing research questions on areas that have gained limited
interest in the nomological network of leader-follower dyads and em-
ploy dyad-level analysis with matched data collected from both leaders
and followers.

Based on the findings of the current review, we can summarize
when it is necessary to consider both the leader's and follower's per-
spective and make suggestions in terms of future research questions and
methods to further develop the areas that received limited attention in
leader-follower dyads research. For example, it is important to take a
dyadic perspective when researchers are interested in dyadic phe-
nomena such as:

1. Interaction process, reciprocity, and/or exchange between a leader
and a follower;

2. The interplay of a leader's and a follower's individual characteristics;
3. The agreement/disagreement between a leader's and a follower's

perceptions; and.
4. Emergent properties, components, and characteristics of dyadic re-

lationships.

Additionally, sample research questions that can be addressed by

Table 7
Dimensions of individual-level outcome variables in leader-follower dyads re-
search.

Leader/follower Variable Dimensions

Affect Behavior Cognition Other

Follower Attitude X X
Belief in unionism X
Commitment X X
Dependability X
Developmental
activities

X

Dominance X
Employee self-
development

X

Equity perception X
Extra-role behavior
(e.g., OCB)

X

Idea generation X
Influence in decision
making

X

Ingratiation X X
In-role behavior
(e.g., task
performance,
creative
performance)

X

Intent to remain X
Job burnout X
Job Satisfaction X X
Level in the
organization

X

LMX X X
Loyalty to
supervisor

X

Met expectation X
Nurturance X
Organizational
commitment

X X

Perception of
control

X

Perception of
fairness

X

Performance
(rating)

X

Procedural justice X
Psychological well-
being

X X

Quality of
communication

X

Responsibility to the
union

X

Role ambiguity X
Role conflict X
Salary X
Satisfaction with the
supervisor

X X

Talk time X
Trust X X
Turnover (actual) X
Turnover intentions X
Union loyalty X
VDL quality X
Willingness to work
for the union

X

Work engagement X
Work withdrawal X

Subtotal (follower) 42 9 13 27 2

Table 7 (continued)

Leader/follower Variable Dimensions

Affect Behavior Cognition Other

Leader Affect expression X
Delegation X
Diversity behavior X
Dominance X
Ethical leadership X
Idea generation X
Influence in decision
making

X

Leader effectiveness X X
Liking for leader X
LMX X X
Managerial support X X X
Nurturance X
Petty tyranny X
Quality of
communication

X

Respect for leader X
Talk time X
Trust X X
Work facilitation X

Subtotal (leader) 18 6 12 5 0
Total 60 15 25 32 2

Note. All are individual-level (and not dyad-level) variables.

J. Kim, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101306

13



taking a dyadic perspective include:

1. What underlies the formulation of dyadic relationships and how do
the components interact to build the relationships? (e.g., Other than
LMX, what are the characteristics of low/high performing dyads and
do they operate at the dyad level?; In addition to support for self-
worth and satisfying performance, what can be exchanged within a
dyad to increase the interdependency of a leader and a follower
within a dyad?)

2. What properties emerge after interactions/exchange between a
leader and a follower and how long do these elements take to
emerge within the dyad?

3. For leader-follower congruence studies, what affect- and behavior-
based individual differences can be matched in a dyad to predict
individual and dyadic outcomes?

4. What dyad characteristics can impact better/worse leader-follower
congruence (e.g., relationship perceptions)?

5. What dyad-level consequences can be predicted from leader-fol-
lower dyadic relationships? (e.g., Can individual-level outcomes
studied in leader-follower congruence studies also be examined at
the dyad-level? What are the dyad-level outcomes of low/high-
quality dyadic relationships?)

Finally, suggestions for methodology include:

1. When interested in dyadic phenomenon, collect data on the variable
of interest from both a leader's and a follower's perspective and
combine, when appropriate, responses from the two perspectives to
generate a dyad-level variable. When aggregation of dyad scores of
the focal variable is necessary, test the level of the variable via
WABA or some other appropriate technique after combining the
responses.

2. Specify the type of dyads (i.e., independent vs. dependent dyads)
collected in the study by providing the number of both leaders and
followers in the sample.

3. When dyads are dependent (i.e., nested within groups having one
leader and multiple followers), consider the dependency in the
analysis by either testing the potential group-level effects through
WABA or calculating ICCs, for example, before conducting dyad-
level analyses, or conduct multilevel (random coefficient) modeling
to consider both dyad-level effects and group-level effects (see
Gooty & Yammarino, 2011; Yammarino & Gooty, 2019).

In a more general way, we believe the results of this review point
toward several broad potential future directions for research related to
leader-follower dyads. First, there is a great need to unpack and explore
the temporal dynamics of leader-follower relationships. The process-
oriented theories related to leader-follower dyads (e.g., individualized
leadership and relational leadership theory) have received very little
empirical attention from a pure dyad perspective. This is unfortunate as
dyadic phenomena do not always emerge from leader-follower inter-
actions (see Gooty & Yammarino, 2011; Yammarino & Gooty, 2017),
and it would be helpful to know how the various temporal dynamics
suggested by existing theories inform our understanding of these rea-
lities. Moreover, given the potential value of high quality leader-fol-
lower dyadic relationships to positively impact an array of important
outcomes (e.g., Dansereau et al., 1984; Gooty & Yammarino, 2016;
Markham et al., 2010), it would be insightful to enhance understanding
of factors that could accelerate the rate of development for these re-
lationships.

There is no doubt that the longitudinal studies needed to explore
such leader-follower relationships are challenging: they require in-
tensive repeated data collection and additional modeling complexities
(e.g., Bliese & Lang, 2016; Ployhart & Vandenberg, 2010). However,
recent advances in big data and the increasing availability of “digital
traces” (Kozlowski, Chao, Chang, & Fernandez, 2015) may ease the

collection of repeated data for both leaders and followers. Additionally,
there are likely to be ways to combine existing dyadic data analysis
methodologies with multilevel modeling and other growth modeling
techniques (e.g., Bliese & Ployhart, 2002) to address modeling com-
plexities. Lastly, there are potentially interesting ways in which com-
putational models/agent-based simulations can be coupled with tar-
geted empirical studies (cf. Grand, Braun, Kuljanin, Kozlowski, & Chao,
2016) to shed light on and investigate important temporal aspects in-
volved with the development and maintenance of leader-follower
dyadic phenomena.

Second, there is room to further investigate the conceptual com-
plexities involved with dependent leader-follower dyads. While this
review demonstrates that these types of dyads are common, much of
existing research has focused on the methodological implications of
these dyads. The unique theoretical implications associated with these
types of dyads, such as the potential for there to be contagion and other
diffusion effects among leader-follower dyads in a given group and the
possibility for characteristics associated with follower-follower dyads to
impact leader-follower dyads, have yet to be incorporated into existing
theories regarding leader-follower dyads. Such considerations are likely
to be particularly important as scholarship in this area more fully in-
vestigates the temporal aspects involved with the development and
maintenance of leader-follower dyadic phenomena.

Third, we see potential for the use of network-related approaches to
examine leader-follower dyadic phenomena. The dyad is a fundamental
unit of analysis in network-based approaches, and it offers the added
benefit of providing the ability to visualize and explore the broader
pattern and configuration of dyads in a given unit (Borgatti & Foster,
2003; Borgatti, Mehra, Brass, & Labianca, 2009; Wasserman & Faust,
1994). Despite these applicable and potentially insightful aspects of
network-based methods, this review did not identify any “pure” dyad
leadership studies that used network techniques. There is thus an op-
portunity to leverage network approaches, particularly exponential
random graph models (Kim, Howard, Pahnke, & Boeker, 2016; Lusher,
Koskinen, & Robins, 2013) and associated multilevel extensions (Wang,
Robins, Pattison, & Lazega, 2013; Zappa & Lomi, 2015), in future
leader-follower dyads studies.

Fourth, there are opportunities to explore the bottom-up impact of
dyad-level phenomena and outcomes on phenomena at a higher-level of
analysis beyond the dyad. While this review found that the examination
of dyad-level outcomes was relatively rare (especially when compared
to the emphasis on outcomes at the individual level), consideration of
the impact at the group/team or higher levels of analysis was practi-
cally nonexistent. This is surprising as dyads are frequently referred to
as the fundamental building blocks of groups/teams and are likely to
play an important role in the emergence of a variety of group/team
phenomena (e.g., cohesion, trusting environment, climate) (e.g., Liden
et al., 2016). Moreover, prior research suggests that leader-follower
dyads are likely to be a particularly salient set of dyads in a given
group/team (Bass, 2008; Gooty & Yammarino, 2011; Yammarino &
Gooty, 2017). We therefore see possibilities for future theoretical and
empirical research on leader-follower dyads to enhance understanding
of how the dynamics and outcomes associated with these dyads can
impact phenomena and outcomes at the group/team levels of analysis.

Finally, given our review of pure leader-follower dyad relationships,
we believe it is premature to offer specific practical implications when
we do not know much about leader-follower dyads yet. If leader-fol-
lower dyads research expands by addressing more diverse research
questions and including more constructs, and the findings are re-
plicated, then we would be able to provide practical implications such
as how to build high-performing dyadic relationships, how to manage
low-quality dyadic relationships, and what leaders and followers can
expect from their good/poor dyadic relationships. Until that point in
the development of this line of research (i.e., more data, more re-
plications, better understanding of foundational issues), we believe that
it is prudent scientifically to avoid asserting practical implications when

J. Kim, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101306

14



they are not warranted or may be inaccurate.

Conclusion

The current review presents a summary of leader-follower dyads
research and identifies areas that have been understudied and require
additional theoretical and empirical attention. We also have provided
suggestions regarding several new promising directions for future re-
search on leader-follower dyads to explore. Our overall hope is that
these findings stimulate greater specificity in future leader-follower
dyads research, increase the appropriate investigation of purely dyadic
phenomena between leaders and followers, and lay the groundwork for
a new wave of research related to leader-follower dyads.

References1

*Adebayo, D. O., & Udegbe, I. B. (2004). Gender in the boss–subordinate relationship: A
Nigerian study. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 25(4), 515–525. https://doi.org/
10.1002/job.255.

*Allinson, C. W., Armstrong, S. J., & Hayes, J. (2001). The effects of cognitive style on
leader-member exchange: A study of manager-subordinate dyads. Journal of
Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 74(2), 201–220. https://doi.org/10.
1348/096317901167316.

Atwater, L. E., & Yammarino, F. J. (1997). Self-other rating agreement: A review and
model. Atwater, Leanne E.; Yammarino, Francis J., & Ferris, Gerald R. (Eds). (1997).
Research in Personnel and Human Resources Management, Vol. 15 (pp. 121–174).
US: Elsevier science/JAI Press.

*Avey, J. B., West, B. J., & Crossley, C. D. (2008). The association between ethnic con-
gruence in the supervisor-subordinate dyad and subordinate organizational position
and salary. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 81(3), 551–566.
https://doi.org/10.1348/096317907X241588.

Bass, B. M. (2008). The Bass handbook of leadership: Theory, research, and management
applications. New York, NY: Free Press.

*Bauer, T. N., & Green, S. G. (1996). Development of leader–member exchange: A
longitudinal test. Academy of Management Journal, 39(6), 1538–1567. https://doi.
org/10.2307/257068.

Bernerth, J. B., Armenakis, A. A., Feild, H. S., Giles, W. F., & Walker, H. J. (2007).
Leader–member social exchange (LMSX): Development and validation of a scale.
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 28(8), 979–1003. https://doi.org/10.1002/job.
443.

Bliese, P. D., & Lang, J. W. (2016). Understanding relative and absolute change in dis-
continuous growth models: Coding alternatives and implications for hypothesis
testing. Organizational Research Methods, 19(4), 562–592. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1094428116633502.

Bliese, P. D., & Ployhart, R. E. (2002). Growth modeling using random coefficient models:
Model building, testing, and illustrations. Organizational Research Methods, 5(4),
362–387. https://doi.org/10.1177/109442802237116.

Borgatti, S. P., & Foster, P. C. (2003). The network paradigm in organizational research: A
review and typology. Journal of Management, 29(6), 991–1013. https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0149-2063(03)00087-4.

Borgatti, S. P., Mehra, A., Brass, D. J., & Labianca, G. (2009). Network analysis in the
social sciences. Science, 323(5916), 892–895. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
1165821.

*Brouer, R. L., Duke, A., Treadway, D. C., & Ferris, G. R. (2009). The moderating effect of
political skill on the demographic dissimilarity — Leader–member exchange quality
relationship. The Leadership Quarterly, 20(2), 61–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
leaqua.2009.01.015.

*Byza, O. A., Schuh, S. C., Dörr, S. L., Spörrle, M., & Maier, G. W. (2017). Are two cynics
better than one? Toward understanding effects of leader–follower (in-) congruence in
social cynicism. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 38(8), 1246–1259. https://doi.
org/10.1002/job.2200.

*Caligiuri, P. M., & Day, D. V. (2000). Effects of self-monitoring on technical, contextual,
and assignment-specific performance: A study of cross-national work performance
ratings. Group & Organization Management, 25(2), 154–174. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1059601100252004.

*Callan, V. J. (1993). Subordinate–manager communication in different sex dyads:
Consequences for job satisfaction. Journal of Occupational and Organizational
Psychology, 66(1), 13–27. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8325.1993.tb00513.x.

Caplan, R. D. (1987). Person-environment fit theory and organizations: Commensurate
dimensions, time perspectives, and mechanisms. Journal of Vocational Behavior,
31(3), 248–267. https://doi.org/10.1016/0001-8791(87)90042-X.

*Carter, M. Z., Mossholder, K. W., Feild, H. S., & Armenakis, A. A. (2014).
Transformational leadership, interactional justice, and organizational citizenship
behavior: The effects of racial and gender dissimilarity between supervisors and
subordinates. Group & Organization Management, 39(6), 691–719. https://doi.org/10.
1177/1059601114551605.

*Chrobot-Mason, D. (2004). Managing racial differences: The role of majority managers'
ethnic identity development on minority employee perceptions of support. Group &
Organization Management, 29(1), 5–31. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1059601103252102.

*Chun, J. U., Cho, K., & Sosik, J. J. (2016). A multilevel study of group-focused and
individual-focused transformational leadership, social exchange relationships, and
performance in teams. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 37(3), 374–396. https://
doi.org/10.1002/job.2048.

*Chun, J. U., Yammarino, F. J., Dionne, S. D., Sosik, J. J., & Moon, H. K. (2009).
Leadership across hierarchical levels: Multiple levels of management and multiple
levels of analysis. The Leadership Quarterly, 20(5), 689–707. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.leaqua.2009.06.003.

*Clarke, N., & Mahadi, N. (2017). Differences between follower and dyadic measures of
LMX as mediators of emotional intelligence and employee performance, well-being,
and turnover intention. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology,
26(3), 373–384. https://doi.org/10.1080/1359432X.2016.1263185.

Cogliser, C. C., Schriesheim, C. A., Scandura, T. A., & Gardner, W. L. (2009). Balance in
leader and follower perceptions of leader–member exchange: Relationships with
performance and work attitudes. The Leadership Quarterly, 20(3), 452–465. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2009.03.010.

*Colbert, A. E., Kristof-Brown, A. L., Bradley, B. H., & Barrick, M. R. (2008). CEO
transformational leadership: The role of goal importance congruence in top man-
agement teams. Academy of Management Journal, 51(1), 81–96. https://doi.org/10.
5465/AMJ.2008.30717744.

Colquitt, J. A., Baer, M. D., Long, D. M., & Halvorsen-Ganepola, M. D. (2014). Scale
indicators of social exchange relationships: A comparison of relative content validity.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 99(4), 599–618. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0036374.

*Courtright, J. A., Fairhurst, G. T., & Rogers, L. E. (1989). Interaction patterns in organic
and mechanistic system. Academy of Management Journal, 32(4), 773–802. https://
doi.org/10.2307/256568.

Cronbach, L. J., & Meehl, P. E. (1955). Construct validity in psychological tests.
Psychological Bulletin, 52(4), 281–302. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0040957.

Dansereau, F. (1995). A dyadic approach to leadership: Creating and nurturing this ap-
proach under fire. The Leadership Quarterly, 6(4), 479–490. https://doi.org/10.1016/
1048-9843(95)90022-5.

Dansereau, F., Alutto, J. A., & Yammarino, F. J. (1984). Theory testing in organizational
behavior: The varient approach. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Dansereau, F., Cashman, J., & Graen, G. (1973). Instrumentality theory and equity theory
as complementary approaches in predicting the relationship of leadership and turn-
over among managers. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 10(2),
184–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/0030-5073(73)90012-3.

Dansereau, F., Graen, G., & Haga, W. J. (1975). A vertical dyad linkage approach to
leadership within formal organizations: A longitudinal investigation of the role
making process. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 13(1), 46–78.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0030-5073(75)90005-7.

Dansereau, F., Yammarino, F. J., & Markham, S. E. (1995). Leadership: The multiple-level
approaches. The Leadership Quarterly, 6(2), https://doi.org/10.1016/1048-9843(95)
90030-6 97–109 and 251–263.

*Dansereau, F., Yammarino, F. J., Markham, S. E., Alutto, J. A., Newman, J., Dumas, M.,
... Keller, T. (1995). Individualized leadership: A new multiple-level approach. The
Leadership Quarterly, 6(3), 413–450. https://doi.org/10.1016/1048-9843(95)
90016-0.

*Deluga, R. J. (1998). Leader-member exchange quality and effectiveness ratings: The
role of subordinate-supervisor conscientiousness similarity. Group & Organization
Management, 23(2), 189–216. https://doi.org/10.1177/1059601198232006.

Dionne, S. D., Gupta, A., Sotak, K. L., Shirreffs, K. A., Serban, A., Hao, C., ... Yammarino,
F. J. (2014). A 25-year perspective on levels of analysis in leadership research. The
Leadership Quarterly, 25(1), 6–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2013.11.002.

*Douglas, C. (2012). The moderating role of leader and follower sex in dyads on the
leadership behavior–leader effectiveness relationships. The Leadership Quarterly,
23(1), 163–175. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2011.11.013.

Dulebohn, J. H., Bommer, W. H., Liden, R. C., Brouer, R. L., & Ferris, G. R. (2012). A meta-
analysis of antecedents and consequences of leader-member exchange: Integrating
the past with an eye toward the future. Journal of Management, 38(6), 1715–1759.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206311415280.

Dulebohn, J. H., Wu, D., & Liao, C. (2017). Does liking explain variance above and be-
yond LMX? A meta-analysis. Human Resource Management Review, 27(1), 149–166.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrmr.2016.09.008.

*Dwertmann, D. J. G., & Boehm, S. A. (2016). Status matters: The asymmetric effects of
supervisor-subordinate disability incongruence and climate for inclusion. Academy of
Management Journal, 59(1), 44–64. https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2014.0093.

Edwards, J. R. (1994). Regression analysis as an alternative to difference scores. Journal
of Management, 20(3), 683–689. https://doi.org/10.1177/014920639402000311.

Edwards, J. R., & Parry, M. E. (1993). On the use of polynomial regression equations as an
alternative to difference scores in organizational research. Academy of Management
Journal, 36(6), 1577–1613. https://doi.org/10.2307/256822.

Fairhurst, G. T., & Uhl-Bien, M. (2012). Organizational discourse analysis (ODA):
Examining leadership as a relational process. The Leadership Quarterly, 23(6),
1043–1062. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2012.10.005.

*Farh, J.-L., Tsui, A. S., Xin, K., & Cheng, B.-S. (1998). The influence of relational de-
mography and guanxi: The Chinese case. Organization Science, 9(4), 471–488. https://
doi.org/10.1287/orsc.9.4.471.

Ferris, G. R., & Harrell-Cook, G. (1998). Assumptions, interpersonal dynamics, and or-
ganizational contexts in the individualized leadership approach. In F. Dansereau, & F.
J. Yammarino (Eds.). Monographs in organizational behavior and industrial relations, 24
(pp. 411–420). Stamford, CT: JAI Press Inc.1 The 79 articles included in this review are marked with an asterisk.

J. Kim, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101306

15

https://doi.org/10.1002/job.255
https://doi.org/10.1002/job.255
https://doi.org/10.1348/096317901167316
https://doi.org/10.1348/096317901167316
https://doi.org/10.1348/096317907X241588
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0020
https://doi.org/10.2307/257068
https://doi.org/10.2307/257068
https://doi.org/10.1002/job.443
https://doi.org/10.1002/job.443
https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428116633502
https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428116633502
https://doi.org/10.1177/109442802237116
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0149-2063(03)00087-4
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0149-2063(03)00087-4
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1165821
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1165821
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2009.01.015
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2009.01.015
https://doi.org/10.1002/job.2200
https://doi.org/10.1002/job.2200
https://doi.org/10.1177/1059601100252004
https://doi.org/10.1177/1059601100252004
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8325.1993.tb00513.x
https://doi.org/10.1016/0001-8791(87)90042-X
https://doi.org/10.1177/1059601114551605
https://doi.org/10.1177/1059601114551605
https://doi.org/10.1177/1059601103252102
https://doi.org/10.1177/1059601103252102
https://doi.org/10.1002/job.2048
https://doi.org/10.1002/job.2048
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2009.06.003
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2009.06.003
https://doi.org/10.1080/1359432X.2016.1263185
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2009.03.010
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2009.03.010
https://doi.org/10.5465/AMJ.2008.30717744
https://doi.org/10.5465/AMJ.2008.30717744
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0036374
https://doi.org/10.2307/256568
https://doi.org/10.2307/256568
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0040957
https://doi.org/10.1016/1048-9843(95)90022-5
https://doi.org/10.1016/1048-9843(95)90022-5
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0135
https://doi.org/10.1016/0030-5073(73)90012-3
https://doi.org/10.1016/0030-5073(75)90005-7
https://doi.org/10.1016/1048-9843(95)90030-6
https://doi.org/10.1016/1048-9843(95)90030-6
https://doi.org/10.1016/1048-9843(95)90016-0
https://doi.org/10.1016/1048-9843(95)90016-0
https://doi.org/10.1177/1059601198232006
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2013.11.002
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2011.11.013
https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206311415280
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrmr.2016.09.008
https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2014.0093
https://doi.org/10.1177/014920639402000311
https://doi.org/10.2307/256822
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2012.10.005
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.9.4.471
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.9.4.471
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0210


Fischer, T., Dietz, J., & Antonakis, J. (2017). Leadership process models: A review and
synthesis. Journal of Management, 43(6), 1726–1753. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0149206316682830.

*Foley, S., Linnehan, F., Greenhaus, J. H., & Weer, C. H. (2006). The impact of gender
similarity, racial similarity, and work culture on family-supportive supervision. Group
& Organization Management, 31(4), 420–441. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1059601106286884.

Ford, L. R., & Seers, A. (2006). Relational leadership and team climates: Pitting differ-
entiation versus agreement. The Leadership Quarterly, 17(3), 258–270. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2006.02.005.

Gerstner, C. R., & Day, D. V. (1997). Meta-analytic review of leader–member exchange
theory: Correlates and construct issues. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82(6), 827–844.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.82.6.827.

*Glomb, T. M., & Welsh, E. T. (2005). Can opposites attract? Personality heterogeneity in
supervisor-subordinate dyads as a predictor of subordinate outcomes. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 90(4), 749–757. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.90.4.749.

Gooty, J., Serban, A., Thomas, J. S., Gavin, M. B., & Yammarino, F. J. (2012). Use and
misuse of levels of analysis in leadership research: An illustrative review of lea-
der–member exchange. The Leadership Quarterly, 23(6), 1080–1103. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.leaqua.2012.10.002.

Gooty, J., & Yammarino, F. J. (2011). Dyads in organizational research: Conceptual issues
and multilevel analyses. Organizational Research Methods, 14(3), 456–483. https://
doi.org/10.1177/1094428109358271.

*Gooty, J., & Yammarino, F. J. (2016). The leader–member exchange relationship: A
multisource, cross-level investigation. Journal of Management, 42(4), 915–935.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206313503009.

Graen, G. (1976). Role-making processes within complex organizations. In M. D.
Dunnette (Ed.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (pp.
1201–1245). Chicago: Rand-McNally, 1201–1245.

Graen, G., & Cashman, J. F. (1975). A role-making model of leadership in formal orga-
nizations: A developmental approach. In J. G. Hunt, & L. L. Larson (Eds.). Leadership
frontiers (pp. 143–166). Kent, OH: Kent State University Press.

Graen, G. B., & Uhl-Bien, M. (1995). Relationship-based approach to leadership:
Development of leader-member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 25 years:
Applying a multi-level multi-domain perspective. The Leadership Quarterly, 6(2),
219–247. https://doi.org/10.1016/1048-9843(95)90036-5.

Grand, J. A., Braun, M. T., Kuljanin, G., Kozlowski, S. W., & Chao, G. T. (2016). The
dynamics of team cognition: A process-oriented theory of knowledge emergence in
teams. Journal of Applied Psychology, 101(10), 1353–1385. https://doi.org/10.1037/
apl0000136.

*Greene, C. N. (1972). Relationships among role accuracy, compliance, performance
evaluation, and satisfaction within managerial dyads. Academy of Management
Journal, 15(2), 205–215. https://doi.org/10.2307/254912.

*Greene, C. N., & Organ, D. W. (1973). An evaluation of causal models linking the re-
ceived role with job satisfaction. Administrative Science Quarterly, 18(1), 95–103.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2391931.

*Guarana, C. L., & Barnes, C. M. (2017). Lack of sleep and the development of leader-
follower relationships over time. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 141, 57–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.obhdp.2017.04.003.

*Hsiung, H.-H., & Tsai, W.-C. (2009). Job definition discrepancy between supervisors and
subordinates: The antecedent role of LMX and outcomes. Journal of Occupational and
Organizational Psychology, 82(1), 89–112. https://doi.org/10.1348/
096317908X292374.

*Huang, X., & Iun, J. (2006). The impact of subordinate–supervisor similarity in growth-
need strength on work outcomes: The mediating role of perceived similarity. Journal
of Organizational Behavior, 27(8), 1121–1148. https://doi.org/10.1002/job.415.

*Huang, X., Wright, R. P., Chiu, W. C. K., & Wang, C. (2008). Relational schemas as
sources of evaluation and misevaluation of leader–member exchanges: Some initial
evidence. The Leadership Quarterly, 19(3), 266–282. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
leaqua.2008.03.003.

Hunt, J. G., & Dodge, G. E. (2000). Leadership déjà vu all over again. The Leadership
Quarterly, 11(4), 435–458. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1048-9843(00)00058-8.

Ilies, R., Nahrgang, J. D., & Morgeson, F. P. (2007). Leader-member exchange and citi-
zenship behaviors: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92(1), 269–277.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.92.1.269.

*Iverson, R. D., & Buttigieg, D. M. (1997). Antecedents of union commitment: The impact
of union membership differences in vertical dyads and work group relationships.
Human Relations, 50(12), 1485–1510. https://doi.org/10.1177/
001872679705001202.

Jansen, K. J., & Kristof-Brown, A. L. (2005). Marching to the beat of a different drummer:
Examining the impact of pacing congruence. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 97, 93–105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.obhdp.2005.03.005.

*Johnson, R. E., Lin, S.-H., Kark, R., Van Dijk, D., King, D. D., & Esformes, E. (2017).
Consequences of regulatory fit for leader–follower relationship quality and commit-
ment. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 90(3), 379–406. https://
doi.org/10.1111/joop.12176.

*Jones, J. R., & Harter, J. K. (2005). Race effects on the employee engagement-turnover
intention relationship. Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies, 11(2), 78–88.
https://doi.org/10.1177/107179190501100208.

*Jordan, J., Brown, M. E., Treviño, L. K., & Finkelstein, S. (2013). Someone to look up to:
Executive-follower ethical reasoning and perceptions of ethical leadership. Journal of
Management, 39(3), 660–683. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206311398136.

*Jung, D., Yammarino, F. J., & Lee, J. K. (2009). Moderating role of subordinates' atti-
tudes on transformational leadership and effectiveness: A multi-cultural and multi-
level perspective. The Leadership Quarterly, 20(4), 586–603. https://doi.org/10.1016/

j.leaqua.2009.04.011.
*Kant, L., Skogstad, A., Torsheim, T., & Einarsen, S. (2013). Beware the angry leader:

Trait anger and trait anxiety as predictors of petty tyranny. The Leadership Quarterly,
24(1), 106–124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2012.08.005.

*Keller, T., & Dansereau, F. (1995). Leadership and empowerment: A social exchange
perspective. Human Relations, 48(2), 127–146. https://doi.org/10.1177/
001872679504800202.

Kenny, D. A., Kashy, D. A., & Cook, W. L. (2006). Dyadic data analysis. New York, NY:
Guilford.

Kim, J. Y., Howard, M., Pahnke, E. C., & Boeker, W. (2016). Understanding network
formation in strategy research: Exponential random graph models. Strategic
Management Journal, 37(1), 22–44. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.2454.

Kozlowski, S. W., & Ilgen, D. R. (2006). Enhancing the effectiveness of work groups and
teams. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 7(3), 77–124. https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1529-1006.2006.00030.x.

Kozlowski, S. W. J., Chao, G. T., Chang, C.-H., & Fernandez, R. (2015). Team dynamics:
Using “big data” to advance the science of team effectiveness. In S. Tonidandel, E.
King, & J. Cortina (Eds.). Big data at work: The data science revolution and organiza-
tional psychology (pp. 272–309). Routledge Academic: New York, NY.

*Kozlowski, S. W. J., & Doherty, M. J. (1989). Integration of climate and leadership:
Examination of a neglected issue. Journal of Applied Psychology, 74(4), 546–553.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.74.4.546.

Krasikova, D. V., & LeBreton, J. M. (2012). Just the two of us: Misalignment of theory and
methods in examining dyadic phenomena. Journal of Applied Psychology, 97(4),
739–757. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0027962.

Kristof, A. L. (1996). Person-organization fit: An integrative review of its conceptualiza-
tions, measurement, and implications. Personnel Psychology, 49(1), 1–49. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.1996.tb01790.x.

Kristof-Brown, A. L., Zimmerman, R. D., & Johnson, E. C. (2005). Consequences of in-
dividuals' fit at work: A meta-analysis of person-job, person-organization, person-
group, and person-supervisor fit. Personnel Psychology, 58(2), 281–342. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.2005.00672.x.

*Landry, G., & Vandenberghe, C. (2012). Relational commitments in employee-supervisor
dyads and employee job performance. The Leadership Quarterly, 23(3), 293–308.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2011.05.016.

*Li, A., & Bagger, J. (2011). Walking in your shoes: Interactive effects of child care re-
sponsibility difference and gender similarity on supervisory family support and work-
related outcomes. Group & Organization Management, 36(6), 659-691. https//
doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1177/1059601111416234

Liden, R. C., Anand, S., & Vidyarthi, P. (2016). Dyadic relationships. Annual Review of
Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior, 3, 139–166. https://doi.org/
10.1146/annurev-orgpsych-041015-062452.

Liden, R. C., & Graen, G. (1980). Generalizability of the vertical dyad linkage model of
leadership. Academy of Management Journal, 23(3), 451–465. https://doi.org/10.
2307/255511.

Liden, R. C., & Maslyn, J. M. (1998). Multidimensionality of leader-member exchange: An
empirical assessment through scale development. Journal of Management, 24(1),
43–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0149-2063(99)80053-1.

*Liden, R. C., Wayne, S. J., & Stilwell, D. (1993). A longitudinal study on the early de-
velopment of leader-member exchanges. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78(4),
662–674. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.78.4.662.

Liden, R. C., Wu, J., Cao, A. X., & Wayne, S. J. (2016). Leader-member exchange mea-
surement. In T. N. Bauer, & B. Erdogan (Eds.). The Oxford handbook of leader-member
exchange (pp. 29–54). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.

*London, M., & Howat, G. (1978). The relationship between employee commitment and
conflict resolution behavior. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 13(1), 1–14. https://doi.
org/10.1016/0001-8791(78)90066-0.

*Luksyte, A., & Avery, D. R. (2015). Exploring burnout and work-family facilitation as
factors influencing why and when relational demography diminishes employee citi-
zenship. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 88(4), 750–772.
https://doi.org/10.1111/joop.12096.

Lusher, D., Koskinen, J., & Robins, G. (2013). Exponential random graph models for social
networks: Theory, methods, and applications. Cambridge: University Press.

*Markham, S. E., Markham, I. S., & Smith, J. W. (2015). At the crux of dyadic leadership:
Self-other agreement of leaders and direct reports—Analyzing 360-degree feedback.
The Leadership Quarterly, 26(6), 958–977. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2015.10.
001.

*Markham, S. E., Yammarino, F. J., Murry, W. D., & Palanski, M. E. (2010).
Leader–member exchange, shared values, and performance: Agreement and levels of
analysis do matter. The Leadership Quarterly, 21(3), 469–480. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.leaqua.2010.03.010.

Marstand, A. F., Martin, R., & Epitropaki, O. (2017). Complementary person-supervisor
fit: An investigation of supplies-values (SV) fit, leader-member exchange (LMX) and
work outcomes. The Leadership Quarterly, 28(3), 418–437. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
leaqua.2016.10.008.

*Martinez, A. D., Kane, R. E., Ferris, G. R., & Brooks, C. D. (2012). Power in lea-
der–follower work relationships. Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies,
19(2), 142–151. https://doi.org/10.1177/1548051811433358.

*Matta, F. K., Scott, B. A., Koopman, J., & Conlon, D. E. (2015). Does seeing “eye to eye”
affect work engagement and organizational citizenship behavior? A role theory
perspective on LMX agreement. Academy of Management Journal, 58(6), 1686–1708.
https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2014.0106.

Meinecke, A. L., Lehmann-Willenbrock, N., & Kauffeld, S. (2017). What happens during
annual appraisal interviews? How leader-follower interactions unfold and impact
interview outcomes. Journal of Applied Psychology, 102(7), 1054–1074. https://doi.

J. Kim, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101306

16

https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206316682830
https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206316682830
https://doi.org/10.1177/1059601106286884
https://doi.org/10.1177/1059601106286884
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2006.02.005
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2006.02.005
https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.82.6.827
https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.90.4.749
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2012.10.002
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2012.10.002
https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428109358271
https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428109358271
https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206313503009
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0255
https://doi.org/10.1016/1048-9843(95)90036-5
https://doi.org/10.1037/apl0000136
https://doi.org/10.1037/apl0000136
https://doi.org/10.2307/254912
https://doi.org/10.2307/2391931
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.obhdp.2017.04.003
https://doi.org/10.1348/096317908X292374
https://doi.org/10.1348/096317908X292374
https://doi.org/10.1002/job.415
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2008.03.003
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2008.03.003
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1048-9843(00)00058-8
https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.92.1.269
https://doi.org/10.1177/001872679705001202
https://doi.org/10.1177/001872679705001202
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.obhdp.2005.03.005
https://doi.org/10.1111/joop.12176
https://doi.org/10.1111/joop.12176
https://doi.org/10.1177/107179190501100208
https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206311398136
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2009.04.011
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2009.04.011
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2012.08.005
https://doi.org/10.1177/001872679504800202
https://doi.org/10.1177/001872679504800202
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0350
https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.2454
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1529-1006.2006.00030.x
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1529-1006.2006.00030.x
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0365
https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.74.4.546
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0027962
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.1996.tb01790.x
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.1996.tb01790.x
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.2005.00672.x
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.2005.00672.x
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2011.05.016
https://doi.org/10.1177/1059601111416234
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-orgpsych-041015-062452
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-orgpsych-041015-062452
https://doi.org/10.2307/255511
https://doi.org/10.2307/255511
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0149-2063(99)80053-1
https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.78.4.662
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0415
https://doi.org/10.1016/0001-8791(78)90066-0
https://doi.org/10.1016/0001-8791(78)90066-0
https://doi.org/10.1111/joop.12096
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0430
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2015.10.001
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2015.10.001
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2010.03.010
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2010.03.010
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2016.10.008
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2016.10.008
https://doi.org/10.1177/1548051811433358
https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2014.0106
https://doi.org/10.1037/apl0000219


org/10.1037/apl0000219.
Mumford, M. D. (1998). Situations, interactions, and followers: The case of individualized

leadership. In F. Dansereau, & F. J. Yammarino (Eds.). Monographs in organizational
behavior and industrial relations, 24 (pp. 421–427). Stamford, CT: JAI Press Inc.

Nachman, S., Dansereau, F., & Naughton, T. J. (1983). Negotiating latitude: A within-and
between-groups analysis of a key construct in the vertical dyad linkage theory of
leadership. Psychological Reports, 53(1), 171–177. https://doi.org/10.2466/pr0.1983.
53.1.171.

*Olsson, L., Hemlin, S., & Pousette, A. (2012). A multi-level analysis of leader-member
exchange and creative performance in research groups. The Leadership Quarterly,
23(3), 604–619. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2011.12.011.

Paglis, L. L., & Green, S. G. (2002). Both sides now: Supervisor and subordinate per-
spectives on relationship quality. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 32(2),
250–276. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1559-1816.2002.tb00215.x.

*Paustian-Underdahl, S. C., King, E. B., Rogelberg, S. G., Kulich, C., & Gentry, W. A.
(2017). Perceptions of supervisor support: resolving paradoxical patterns across
gender and race. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 90(3),
436–457. doi:https://doi.org/10.1111/joop.12179

*Pearce, J. L., & Xu, Q. J. (2012). Rating performance or contesting status: Evidence
against the homophily explanation for supervisor demographic skew in performance
ratings. Organization Science, 23(2), 373–385. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1100.
0585.

*Pelled, L. H., & Xin, K. R. (1997). Birds of a feather: Leader-member demographic si-
milarity and organizational attachment in Mexico. The Leadership Quarterly, 8(4),
433–450. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1048-9843(97)90023-0.

Ployhart, R. E., & Vandenberg, R. J. (2010). Longitudinal research: The theory, design,
and analysis of change. Journal of Management, 36(1), 94–120. https://doi.org/10.
1177/0149206309352110.

*Pulakos, E. D., & Wexley, K. N. (1983). The relationship among perceptual similarity,
sex, and performance ratings in manager-subordinate dyads. Academy of Management
Journal, 26(1), 129–139. https://doi.org/10.2307/256139.

*Ren, S., & Chadee, D. (2017). Is guanxi always good for employee self-development in
China? Examining non-linear and moderated relationships. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 98, 108–117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvb.2016.10.005.

*Riggs, B. S., & Porter, C. O. L. H. (2017). Are there advantages to seeing leadership the
same? A test of the mediating effects of LMX on the relationship between ILT con-
gruence and employees' development. The Leadership Quarterly, 28(2), https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2016.10.009.

Rockstuhl, T., Dulebohn, J. H., Ang, S., & Shore, L. M. (2012). Leader–member exchange
(LMX) and culture: A meta-analysis of correlates of LMX across 23 countries. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 97(6), 1097–1130. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0029978.

*Rosse, J. G., & Kraut, A. I. (1983). Reconsidering the vertical dyad linkage model of
leadership. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 56(1), 63–71. https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.2044-8325.1983.tb00111.x.

*Schrader, B. W., & Steiner, D. D. (1996). Common comparison standards: An approach to
improving agreement between self and supervisory performance ratings. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 81(6), 813–820. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.81.6.813.

Schriesheim, C. A. (1995). Multivariate and moderated within- and between-entity ana-
lysis (WABA) using hierarchical linear multiple regression. The Leadership Quarterly,
6, 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/1048-9843(95)90002-0.

Schriesheim, C. A., Castro, S. L., & Cogliser, C. C. (1999). Leader-member exchange (LMX)
research: A comprehensive review of theory, measurement, and data-analytic prac-
tices. The Leadership Quarterly, 10(1), 63–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1048-
9843(99)80009-5.

*Schriesheim, C. A., Castro, S. L., Zhou, X. T., & Yammarino, F. J. (2001). The folly of
theorizing “a” but testing “B”: A selective level-of-analysis review of the field and a
detailed leader–member exchange illustration. The Leadership Quarterly, 12(4),
515–551. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1048-9843(01)00095-9.

*Sears, G. J., & Holmvall, C. M. (2010). The joint influence of supervisor and subordinate
emotional intelligence on leader-member exchange. Journal of Business and
Psychology, 25(4), 593–605. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10869-009-9152-y.

Shanock, L. R., Baran, B. E., Gentry, W. A., Pattison, S. C., & Heggestad, E. D. (2010).
Polynomial regression with response surface analysis: A powerful approach for ex-
amining moderation and overcoming limitations of difference scores. Journal of
Business and Psychology, 25(4), 543–554. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10869-010-
9183-4.

*Sherman, J. D., Ezell, H. F., & Odewahn, C. A. (1987). Centralization of decision making
and accountability based on gender. Group & Organization Management, 12(4),
454–463. https://doi.org/10.1177/105960118701200407.

*Sherman, K. E., Kennedy, D. M., Woodard, M. S., & McComb, S. A. (2012). Examining
the “exchange” in leader–member exchange. Journal of Leadership and Organizational
Studies, 19(4), 407–423. https://doi.org/10.1177/1548051812442963.

Sin, H. P., Nahrgang, J. D., & Morgeson, F. P. (2009). Understanding why they don't see
eye to eye: An examination of leader–member exchange (LMX) agreement. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 94(4), 1048–1057. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0014827.

*Snyder, R. A., & Bruning, N. S. (1985). Quality of vertical dyad linkages: Congruence of
supervisor and subordinate competence and role stress as explanatory variables.
Group & Organization Management, 10(1), 81–94. https://doi.org/10.1177/
105960118501000105.

*Triana, M. D. C., Richard, O. C., & Yücel, İ. (2017). Status incongruence and supervisor
gender as moderators of the transformational leadership to subordinate affective
organizational commitment relationship. Personnel Psychology, 70(2), 429–467.
https://doi.org/10.1111/peps.12154.

*Tsai, C.-Y., Dionne, S. D., Wang, A.-C., Spain, S. M., Yammarino, F. J., & Cheng, B.-S.
(2017). Effects of relational schema congruence on leader-member exchange. The

Leadership Quarterly, 28(2), 268–284. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2016.11.005.
Tse, H. H. M., & Ashkanasy, N. M. (2015). The dyadic level of conceptualization and

analysis: A missing link in multilevel OB research? Journal of Organizational Behavior,
36(8), 1176–1180. https://doi.org/10.1002/job.2010.

Tse, H. H. M., Troth, A. C., Ashkanasy, N. M., & Collins, A. T. (2018). Affect and leader-
member exchange in the new millennium: A state-of-art review and guiding frame-
work. The Leadership Quarterly, 29(1), 135–149. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.
2017.10.002.

*Tsui, A. S., & O'Reilly, C. A., III (1989). Beyond simple demographic effects: The im-
portance of relational demography in superior-subordinate dyads. Academy of
Management Journal, 32(2), 402–423. https://doi.org/10.2307/256368.

*Tsui, A. S., Porter, L. W., & Egan, T. D. (2002). When both similarities and dissimilarities
matter: Extending the concept of relational demography. Human Relations, 55(8),
899–929. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018726702055008176.

Uhl-Bien, M. (2006). Relational leadership theory: Exploring the social processes of lea-
dership and organizing. The Leadership Quarterly, 17(6), 654–676. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.leaqua.2006.10.007.

Uhl-Bien, M., & Ospina, S. (2012). Advancing relational leadership research: A dialogue
among perspectives. Charlotte, NC: IAP.

*Vecchio, R. P., & Bullis, R. C. (2001). Moderators of the influence of supervisor-sub-
ordinate similarity of subordinate outcomes. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(5),
884–896. https://doi.org/10.1037//0021-9010.86.5.884.

Wallis, N. C., Yammarino, F. J., & Feyerherm, A. (2011). Individualized leadership: A
qualitative study of senior executive leaders. The Leadership Quarterly, 22(1),
182–206. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2010.12.015.

Wang, P., Robins, G., Pattison, P., & Lazega, E. (2013). Exponential random graph models
for multilevel networks. Social Networks, 35(1), 96–115. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
socnet.2013.01.004.

Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social network analysis: Methods and applications
(Vol. 8). Cambridge University press.

*Wayne, S. J., & Liden, R. C. (1995). Effects on impression management on performance
ratings: A longitudinal study. Academy of Management Journal, 38(1), 232–260.
https://doi.org/10.2307/256734.

*Wesolowski, M. A., & Mossholder, K. W. (1997). Relational demography in supervisor-
subordinate dyads: Impact on subordinate job satisfaction, burnout, and perceived
procedural justice. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 18(4), 351–362. https://doi.
org/10.1002/(SICI)1099-1379(199707)18:4<351::AID-JOB802>3.0.CO;2-%23.

*Wexley, K. N., Alexander, R. A., Greenawalt, J. P., & Couch, M. A. (1980). Attitudinal
congruence and similarity as related to interpersonal evaluations in manager-sub-
ordinate dyads. Academy of Management Journal, 23(2), 320–330. https://doi.org/10.
2307/255434.

*Wexley, K. N., & Pulakos, E. D. (1982). Sex effects on performance ratings on man-
ager–subordinate dyads: A field study. Journal of Applied Psychology, 67(4), 433–439.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.67.4.433.

*Wexley, K. N., & Pulakos, E. D. (1983). The effects of perceptual congruence and sex on
subordinates' performance appraisals of their managers. Academy of Management
Journal, 26(4), 666–676. https://doi.org/10.2307/255914.

*Wilhelm, C. C., Herd, A. M., & Steiner, D. D. (1993). Attributional conflict between
managers and subordinates: An investigation of leader-member exchange effects.
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 14(6), 531–544. https://doi.org/10.1002/job.
4030140603.

*Wohlers, A. J., Hall, M. J., & London, M. (1993). Subordinates rating managers:
Organizational and demographic correlates of self/subordinate agreement. Journal of
Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 66(3), 263–275. https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.2044-8325.1993.tb00538.x.

*Wolfram, H., & Mohr, G. (2009). Transformational leadership, team goal fulfillment, and
follower work satisfaction: The moderating effects of deep-level similarity in lea-
dership dyads. Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies, 15(3), 260–274.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1548051808326595.

*Wu, L.-Z., Kwan, H. K., Wei, L.-Q., & Liu, J. (2013). Ingratiation in the workplace: The
role of subordinate and supervisor political skill. Journal of Management Studies,
50(6), 991–1017. https://doi.org/10.1111/joms.12033.

Yammarino, F. J. (1998). Multivariate aspects of the varient/WABA approach: A dis-
cussion and leadership illustration. The Leadership Quarterly, 9(2), 203–227. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S1048-9843(98)90005-4.

Yammarino, F. J., & Dansereau, F. (2002). Individualized leadership. Journal of Leadership
and Organizational Studies, 9(1), 90–99. https://doi.org/10.1177/
107179190200900107.

Yammarino, F. J., Dionne, S. D., Chun, J. U., & Dansereau, F. (2005). Leadership and
levels of analysis: A state-of-the-science review. The Leadership Quarterly, 16(6),
879–919. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2005.09.002.

*Yammarino, F. J., & Dubinsky, A. J. (1992). Superior-subordinate relationships: A
multiple levels of analysis approach. Human Relations, 45(6), 575–600. https://doi.
org/10.1177/001872679204500603.

*Yammarino, F. J., & Dubinsky, A. J. (1994). Transformational leadership theory: Using
levels of analysis to determine boundary conditions. Personnel Psychology, 47(4),
787–811. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.1994.tb01576.

*Yammarino, F. J., Dubinsky, A. J., Comer, L. B., & Jolson, M. A. (1997). Women and
transformational and contingent reward leadership: A multiple levels of analysis
perspective. Academy of Management Journal, 40(1), 205–222. https://doi.org/10.
2307/257027.

Yammarino, F. J., & Gooty, J. (2017). Multi-level issues and dyads in leadership research.
In B. Schyns, R. Hall, & P. Neves (Eds.). Handbook of methods in leadership research
(pp. 229–255). Cheltenham, Glos, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.

Yammarino, F. J., & Gooty, J. (2019). Cross-level models. In S. E. Humphrey, & J. M.

J. Kim, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101306

17

https://doi.org/10.1037/apl0000219
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0465
https://doi.org/10.2466/pr0.1983.53.1.171
https://doi.org/10.2466/pr0.1983.53.1.171
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2011.12.011
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1559-1816.2002.tb00215.x
https://doi.org/10.1111/joop.12179
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1100.0585
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1100.0585
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1048-9843(97)90023-0
https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206309352110
https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206309352110
https://doi.org/10.2307/256139
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvb.2016.10.005
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2016.10.009
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2016.10.009
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0029978
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8325.1983.tb00111.x
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8325.1983.tb00111.x
https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.81.6.813
https://doi.org/10.1016/1048-9843(95)90002-0
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1048-9843(99)80009-5
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1048-9843(99)80009-5
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1048-9843(01)00095-9
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10869-009-9152-y
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10869-010-9183-4
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10869-010-9183-4
https://doi.org/10.1177/105960118701200407
https://doi.org/10.1177/1548051812442963
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0014827
https://doi.org/10.1177/105960118501000105
https://doi.org/10.1177/105960118501000105
https://doi.org/10.1111/peps.12154
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2016.11.005
https://doi.org/10.1002/job.2010
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2017.10.002
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2017.10.002
https://doi.org/10.2307/256368
https://doi.org/10.1177/0018726702055008176
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2006.10.007
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2006.10.007
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0610
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0610
https://doi.org/10.1037//0021-9010.86.5.884
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2010.12.015
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2013.01.004
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2013.01.004
https://doi.org/10.2307/256734
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1099-1379(199707)18:4<351::AID-JOB802>3.0.CO;2-%23
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1099-1379(199707)18:4<351::AID-JOB802>3.0.CO;2-%23
https://doi.org/10.2307/255434
https://doi.org/10.2307/255434
https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.67.4.433
https://doi.org/10.2307/255914
https://doi.org/10.1002/job.4030140603
https://doi.org/10.1002/job.4030140603
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8325.1993.tb00538.x
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8325.1993.tb00538.x
https://doi.org/10.1177/1548051808326595
https://doi.org/10.1111/joms.12033
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1048-9843(98)90005-4
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1048-9843(98)90005-4
https://doi.org/10.1177/107179190200900107
https://doi.org/10.1177/107179190200900107
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2005.09.002
https://doi.org/10.1177/001872679204500603
https://doi.org/10.1177/001872679204500603
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.1994.tb01576
https://doi.org/10.2307/257027
https://doi.org/10.2307/257027
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0705
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0705
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(17)30788-9/rf0705


LeBreton (Eds.). Handbook of multilevel theory, measurement, and analysis (pp. 563–
585). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. https://doi.org/10.
1037/0000115-025.

Yammarino, F. J., Salas, E., Serban, A., Shirreffs, K., & Shuffler, M. L. (2012).
Collectivistic leadership approaches: Putting the “we” in leadership science and
practice. Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 5(4), 382–402. https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1754-9434.2012.01467.x.

*Yammarino, F. J., Spangler, W. D., & Dubinsky, A. J. (1998). Transformational and
contingent reward leadership: Individual, dyad, and group levels of analysis. The

Leadership Quarterly, 9(1), 27–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1048-9843(98)90041-8.
Zappa, P., & Lomi, A. (2015). The analysis of multilevel networks in organizations:

Models and empirical tests. Organizational Research Methods, 18(3), 542–569. https://
doi.org/10.1177/1094428115579225.

*Zhang, Z., Wang, M., & Shi, J. (2012). Leader-follower congruence in proactive per-
sonality and work outcomes: The mediating role of leader-member exchange.
Academy of Management Journal, 55(1), 111–130. Doi: 10.5465Y2009.0865.

J. Kim, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101306

18

https://doi.org/10.1037/0000115-025
https://doi.org/10.1037/0000115-025
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1754-9434.2012.01467.x
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1754-9434.2012.01467.x
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1048-9843(98)90041-8
https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428115579225
https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428115579225


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

The Leadership Quarterly

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua

The Leadership Quarterly Yearly Review: Comprehensive and integrative perspectives on
leadership research, theory, and methods

The Yearly Review issue of The Leadership Quarterly publishes high-
quality, high-impact, state-of-the-science reviews across a diverse set of
leadership topics. It has been an annual mainstay of the journal since
the Yearly Review was introduced in 2000. The 2020 issue follows that
tradition and aspires to extend and enhance contributions to leadership
science. The process to publication involves a rigorous, peer-review
system described in more detail in the following paragraph. The im-
portance afforded to the Yearly Review issue is such that it appears as
the first published issue in February for each volume of the journal.

There are a few features that make the Yearly Review distinct from
regular issues of the journal. As the Yearly Review Editor, I am re-
sponsible for this category of articles in consultation with the Editor in
Chief. A competitive call is published early each year for authors to
submit a 10-page proposal, plus all end matter. Each proposal is first
screened by me and the Editor in Chief. Proposals that are judged to be
in scope and are sufficiently well-developed are sent out for review.
Proposals receive detailed feedback from at least two reviewers for the
authors to consider and address in their respective full manuscripts.
Point-by-point responses to the reviewers' comments are required along
with submission of the review manuscript. Invitation to submit a full
manuscript does not guarantee eventual publication; however, the re-
viewers and I work in a constructive and developmental manner to
enhance the publication potential of each manuscript. Typically, full
manuscripts undergo at least two and typically more revisions before a
final decision is made with regard to publication suitability in the
Yearly Review. These articles take the form of narrative reviews, in-
tegrations, meta-analyses, and other formats related to the focal topic of
leadership, broadly defined.

In terms of article scope, we seek to publish reviews on substantive
areas of leadership theory and research, or to address relevant metho-
dological issues. In particular, we seek to publish articles that have the
potential to launch a new line of research, redirect existing research
streams, propose concrete research agendas, or shut down areas of
scholarship that are no longer relevant or have ceased making mean-
ingful contributions to the field. What we do not typically publish in the
Yearly Review are theory-development pieces into new areas of lea-
dership science. Those types of papers should be submitted for review
to the regular issue or a relevant special issue. Regardless of focus or
approach, we strive for Yearly Review articles to be “pushing the en-
velope” in the respective area of leadership being reviewed. Authors are
encouraged to take a stand, be provocative, and even stir some con-
troversy, if needed.

The current issue comprises 13 articles that review relevant

leadership literature and forge directions for future researchers to build
on. The lead article focuses on an important methodological topic by
providing an introduction, review, and guidelines for conducting nat-
ural experiments in the leadership field (Jost Sieweke and Simone
Santoni). Other articles in the issue include a review and critique of the
“healthy leadership” literature (Cort Rudolph and colleagues) and ex-
amining the contemporary topic of leading teams in the digital age
(Lindsay Larson and Leslie DeChurch), reviewing much of what is
known on leadership and technology. Additional reviews include the
topics of functional leadership in multi- and inter-team contexts
(Dorothy Carter and colleagues); leader-follower transgressions and
relationship repair and outcomes (Olga Epitropaki and colleagues); si-
tuation-trait approaches and situation-encoding schema in leader de-
cision-making (Ryan Gottfredson and Christopher Reina); leadership in
and of socio-political vanguards, also known as political fringe groups
(Richard Marcy); examining what we know about the daily causes and
consequences of leadership behaviors on what is called everyday lea-
dership (Thomas Kelemen and colleagues); follower transformation as
the foundation of transformational leadership theory (Nathapon
Siangchokyoo and colleagues); evolution-based dual strategies for un-
derstanding leadership in modern organizations (Kaylene McClanahan);
leader-follower dyads (Kim Jayoung and colleagues); and leadership
succession in business and political organizations (Bassam Farah and
colleagues). The final article provides a review of the literature pub-
lished during the third decade of The Leadership Quarterly (Kevin Lowe
and colleagues) following an informal tradition that takes decennial
perspectives on the accumulation of leadership science in the journal. It
is a diverse and wide-ranging collection of article topics that will cer-
tainly stimulate – and possibly even provoke – your thinking about
leadership research, theory, and methods. In keeping with the spirit of
the journal and its international focus, the authorship teams in this
volume represent multiple countries and continents.

In closing, on behalf of the authors and myself, many thanks to the
reviewers for their constructive and developmental comments that ul-
timately improved every article in this issue. Looking ahead, I en-
courage future authors to consider submitting their proposals for future
Yearly Review issues that consider timely and provocative leadership
issues. In the meantime, I hope you enjoy reading the 2020 Yearly
Review.

David V. Day
Claremont McKenna College, Claremont, CA 91711, USA

E-mail address: david.day@cmc.edu.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2020.101402

The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101402

Available online 24 February 2020
1048-9843/ © 2020 Published by Elsevier Inc.

T

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/10489843
https://www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2020.101402
mailto:david.day@cmc.edu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2020.101402
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2020.101402
http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.leaqua.2020.101402&domain=pdf


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

The Leadership Quarterly

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua

Call for Proposals

The Leadership Quarterly Yearly Review (LQYR) for 2022
Kevin B Lowe (Incoming Yearly Review Editor)
University of Sydney Business School

The Leadership Quarterly seeks proposals for the 2022 LQYR; his-
torically, these articles are high-impact and important contributions to
the success of the journal. Eligible topics are broadly defined to include
theory, research, and practice in the field of leadership. Published
manuscripts could include systematic literature reviews, theoretical
integrations, bibliometric studies, new methodological developments,
meta-analyses, or some combination of these. The review could be set in
any scientific discipline that studies leadership scientifically, from tra-
ditional organizational behavior, management or industrial-organiza-
tional psychology points of views to other perspectives including but
not limited to evolutionary biology, neuroscience, anthropology, eco-
nomics, or sociology. Of particular interest are contributions that adopt
provocative—but also theoretically or empirically grounded—view-
points that go beyond reviewing the relevant literature to proposing
where the future of leadership studies should, and should not, continue.
For example, are there theories, measures, or practices that no longer
contribute meaningfully to the field of leadership broadly construed?
Are some definitions of constructs badly defined and operationalized?
Should a particular approach to studying leadership be abandoned?
Well-reasoned and soundly-argued papers with persuasive evidence,
serving to stimulate debate and potentially change the field will be
given special consideration in the review process. As always, we en-
courage integrative and synthetic reviews of research streams that are
not only exemplary, but where new developments and insights will
trigger advances in leadership research.

Potential authors are required to submit a 10-page maximum (plus
references, tables, figures, and other end matter not included in the 10-
page maximum), double-spaced proposal outlining the proposal topic

and approach. Authors sending a full manuscript instead of proposal
will not be considered for the LQYR. The proposal must elaborate on
why coverage of a chosen topic(s) is necessary, and concisely sum-
marize the potential contribution of the work in terms of how the
manuscript will serve leadership theory, research, and/or practice per
se or to reshape them. Proposal submissions (and full papers) are sub-
ject to competitive peer-review with an accept/reject option (note,
proposals that are deemed by the editorial team to be exceptional in
terms of excellence will be given an immediate accept/revise decision).

For articles to be published in the first issue of 2022, the please note
the following timetable:

Submission stage Deadline

1. Proposals submitted through EVISE choosing LQYR 2020
as the item type

16 October 2020*

2. Decisions sent to authors for paper commissioning 15 January 2021
3. Invited paper first full drafts submission deadline 15 April 2021
4. Decisions sent to authors for manuscript revision 31 May 2021
5. Deadline for receipt of final manuscripts from invited

authors
1 September 2021

*Authors may submit their proposals starting 16 September 2020;
proposals will be evaluated on a rolling basis.

Questions regarding the appropriateness of a manuscript topic or
idea are welcome; please contact Keven Lowe at kevin.b.lowe@syd-
ney.edu.au

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2020.101400

The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101400

Available online 20 February 2020
1048-9843

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/10489843
https://www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2020.101400
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2020.101400
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2020.101400


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

The Leadership Quarterly

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua

Review

The leadership trilogy: A review of the third decade of The Leadership
Quarterly
William L. Gardnera,⁎, Kevin B. Loweb, Jeremy D. Meuserc, Farzaneh Noghania,
Daniel P. Gulliford, Claudia C. Coglisera
a Texas Tech University, United States of America
b The University of Sydney Business School, Australia
cUniversity of Mississippi, United States of America
dUniversity of Wisconsin - Eau Claire, United States of America

A B S T R A C T

The present research reviews the most recent ten years, 2010–2019, of the work published in The Leadership Quarterly (LQ). We follow on prior decade-focused
reviews published in LQ, including the period 1990–1999 (Lowe & Gardner, 2000) and 2000–2009 (Gardner, Lowe, Cogliser, Moss & Mahoney, 2010). The present
work complements and expands the first two reviews by documenting how the field has evolved with new characters, methodologies, and theories emerging while
others decline and become less relevant. We extend the story of how LQ emerged from a start-up niche journal, evolved into the predominant outlet for leadership
research and new theories, gained awareness of a growing need to reduce construct proliferation, and adopted increasingly sophisticated methodological techniques
that call into question some of the field's prior research findings.

Introduction

The purpose of this manuscript is to review the most recent ten
years, 2010–2019, of the research published in The Leadership Quarterly.
In preparing this review, we follow on prior decade-focused reviews
published in The Leadership Quarterly (LQ), including the period
1990–1999 (Lowe & Gardner, 2000) and 2000–2009 (Gardner, Lowe,
Moss, Mahoney, & Cogliser, 2010). We maintained key features of past
reviews to provide comparability over time while introducing new
features and variables, including a revised leadership taxonomy
(Meuser et al., 2016), that reflects the evolution of the leadership field
over LQ's third decade. In doing so, we address topics and trends which
may be of interest to readers of LQ specifically, and more broadly to
those who read and publish leadership research across a range of
journals.

Ode to the past, prelude to the present

Lowe and Gardner (2000) chronicled, catalogued, and classified the
first decade of LQ. Originally conceived by Bernard Bass, Bob House,
and Henry Tosi over dinner in 1988, the primary rationales for
founding LQ were two-fold. First, it was to provide a focused outlet for
the publication of leadership research by scholars from management,
psychology, and other disciplines which, at the time, were scattered

over a wide range of journals. Second, it was to provide an inter-
disciplinary home for leadership research that would create a virtuous
cycle of stimulating perspectives across diverse disciplines that would
broaden the impact of leadership scholarship to spur cross-disciplinary
theoretical and methodological innovations.

In its first decade, LQ published 188 articles ranging from a low of
13 articles in the founding year to a high of 24 articles in the concluding
issue of the decade. Nine special issues, spanning a range of topics in-
cluding 360-degree feedback, diversity, levels of analysis, political
leadership, and environmental change, were an important part of at-
tracting manuscripts to LQ in its founding years. Fifty-five percent of
the articles were empirical and 46% were theoretical or review pieces.
Neo-charismatic approaches (e.g., charismatic leadership, transforma-
tional leadership, visionary leadership) were by far the most widely
employed theoretical underpinning (34%) in LQ's first decade. The
second highest number of articles published in the first ten years did not
fall neatly into a specific domain of leadership theory based on the
taxonomy in use and thus were classified as “New Directions” (e.g.,
political leadership, strategic leadership, self-sacrificial leadership).
This finding suggested, at least prima facie, that the journal was deli-
vering on the stated purpose of being open to innovation.

In summarizing the progress of LQ over its first decade, Lowe and
Gardner (2000) concluded that LQ had: 1) made substantial progress
toward its meta-goal of being the leading scholarly journal for

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101379
Received 16 November 2018; Received in revised form 21 December 2019; Accepted 23 December 2019

⁎ Corresponding author at: Rawls College of Business, Texas Tech University, Lubbock 79409, United States of America.
E-mail address: william.gardner@ttu.edu (W.L. Gardner).

The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

Available online 03 February 2020
1048-9843/ Published by Elsevier Inc.

T

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/10489843
https://www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101379
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101379
mailto:william.gardner@ttu.edu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101379
http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101379&domain=pdf


leadership theory and research (p. 464); and 2) successfully moved
from being a new journal to one that was more established for pro-
moting leadership research. The authors suggested that LQ's second
decade would offer an important opportunity to solidify the journal's
emergent position as a place to publish and obtain the best in leadership
research.

In LQ's second decade Gardner et al. (2010) catalogued 353 pub-
lished articles as compared to 188 in the first decade — an increase of
88%. This significant growth in the number of published articles was
achieved by increasing the number of publications per issue and in-
creasing this “quarterly” journal to six issues each year. The number of
pages grew from 4501 in the first decade to 7870 in the second dec-
ade—an increase of 75%. The increased number of articles and pages
did not come at the expense of quality, as the journal's impact factor
continued to climb in the second decade, as indicated by the upward
trend from 2006 (IF = 1.72), to 2007 (IF = 1.77), and 2008
(IF = 2.21). Once again, special issues played an important role in
attracting high quality leadership research to LQ with 17 special issues
published, a near doubling of the nine in the prior decade. Fifty-five
percent of the articles were empirical (it was also 55% in the first
decade), and 42% were theoretical or review pieces (as compared to
46% in the first decade), a remarkably consistent pattern over multiple
time periods and editors. Neo-charismatic approaches were again the
most frequently employed theoretical category with 84 articles pub-
lished in the second decade as compared to 68 neo-charismatic articles
in the first. However, this absolute increase masks the more interesting
relative decrease in the influence of the neo-charismatic paradigm
which declined to 13% of all articles versus 34% in the first decade.
Gardner et al. (2010) observed an even more dramatic change in the
proportion of theories categorized as New Directions. The New Direc-
tions category exploded from 14% of all articles in the first decade to
44% of all articles in the second. Theoretical perspectives identified as
New Directions included: contextual influences on leadership; devel-
opment and identification of leaders and leadership; ethical, servant,
spiritual, and authentic leadership; leading for creativity and innova-
tion; strategic leadership by top executives; leadership in teams and
decision groups; political and public leadership; complexity theory of
leadership; leadership effects of task, technology, distance, and vir-
tuality; ideological and pragmatic leadership; destructive leadership;
and leading change in organizations.

The resurgence of interest in leadership research, spurred in part by
the neo-charismatic paradigms, prompted Gardner et al. (2010) to
abandon the leadership taxonomy used in the prior decade's review. In
an effort to more carefully describe a vibrant field that was experien-
cing many innovations in theoretical development as well as the
methods employed to test those theories, they developed a more con-
temporary leadership taxonomy, which remains influential in the de-
velopment of more recent taxonomies of leadership theory (cf. Dinh
et al., 2014; Meuser et al., 2016).

The expansion of the journal over its second decade in terms of
volume and prominence supports the notion that the journal was de-
livering on the stated purpose of advancing the understanding of lea-
dership as a phenomenon, how to study it, as well as its practical im-
plications for organizations. In summarizing the progress of LQ over its
second decade, Gardner et al. (2010) concluded that: 1) the field of
leadership was more diverse and robust than at any time in recent
decades; 2) there was clear evidence that LQ had played an important
role in advancing the field theoretically and methodologically; and 3)
that LQ had solidified its position as the leading outlet focused on
publishing rigorous leadership research.

We include this brief overview of LQ's journey over the first two
decades because it provides the context for grounding our current re-
view. In this review we seek, as our focal purpose, to describe the
content of the journal over the period 2010–2019. While our primary
focus is on the content in the most recent decade, we also seek to
compare, on several dimensions, the content of the journal's third

decade with that of prior decades. We make this historical comparison
because a secondary purpose of our manuscript is to continue telling
the story of the evolution of The Leadership Quarterly, a story where the
first two chapters have been written in ten-year increments (Gardner
et al., 2010; Lowe & Gardner, 2000). In doing so, we seek to provide
updated answers to the broad research questions we have asked in prior
reviews such as: What is published in LQ and by whom?; Who has
provided editorial leadership for the journal and how has the compo-
sition (disciplinary and structurally) changed during the decade? What
are the topical characteristics (methods and design) and content (the-
ories and constructs) of the research that appears in LQ?; Is LQ the
primary outlet for quality leadership research? To what extent has LQ
met its mission? What is the trajectory of the journal and what might
that vantage point suggest about the next decade of research that will
be published in LQ? In addition, we ask new questions, including:
Where does leadership data come from? What proportion of articles
employ multiple methods/studies?

In preparing this review, we are mindful that the leadership field
has been fortunate to have multiple excellent comprehensive reviews of
the leadership literature in recent years. Dinh et al. (2014) utilized a
process-oriented framework to review 752 leadership articles published
in ten leading journals over a thirteen-year period (2000–2012). In
doing so, their focus was on developing a better taxonomy of leadership
theory that considered both forms of emergence and levels of analysis.
Meuser et al. (2016) reviewed 864 leadership articles published in ten
top journals over a fourteen-year period (2000–2013). Using graphic
network analysis, they drew conclusions about the state of theoretical
integration in leadership research and identified theoretical neighbor-
hoods where focal and supporting leadership theories tended to con-
gregate. Zhu, Song, Zhu, and Johnson (2019) conducted a bibliometric
analysis of co-citation and co-occurrence in 6528 leadership articles
over a 28-year period (1990 to 2017) in an effort to describe the de-
velopmental trajectory of leadership research over time in terms of
significant authors and journals. Zhao and Li (2019) likewise conducted
a bibliographic analysis of leadership theories over the same 28-year
time span, but rather than manually coding documents to create a
single map of 18 leadership theories, they “used software tools to code
and organize 2,115 leadership articles authored by 3,190 authors and
published in 10 academic journals.” (p. 396) Next, they used the
VOSviewer, version 1.6.6 (van Eck & Waltman, 2017, October 23) to
visually represent the inductively-derived taxonomies of 56 popular
leadership research topics, as well as the collaboration networks of 160
highly productive leadership scholars. Lord, Day, Zaccaro, Avolio, and
Eagly (2017) reviewed leadership research published in the Journal of
Applied Psychology over a 99-year period (1917 to 2015). Rather than
comprehensively including all articles published over that period as
was done in the other reviews just described, the approach of Lord et al.
was “selective, emphasizing those publications that represented or
sparked unique turns and conceptual developments in the literature….a
subjective task that drew on our combined experience in the leadership
field” (p. 434).

While these reviews are useful and influential, the current review is
substantively different in terms of scope, scale, and focus. The scope of
this manuscript, in terms of variables of interest, is distinct from these
other reviews which focused squarely on developing a theoretical tax-
onomy (Dinh et al., 2014), providing a network of co-citations (Zhu
et al., 2019), mapping the field of leadership using artificial intelligence
(Zhao & Li, 2019), examining the level of theoretical integration
(Meuser et al., 2016), or looking for seminal inflection points in the
long range trajectory of a journal (Lord et al., 2017). In coding for
leadership theory, our work resembles that of Dinh et al. (2014),
Meuser et al. (2016), and Zhu et al. (2019), but we also code for a range
of variables including study design, sample characteristics, methods
employed (e.g. CFA, rwg, measure adaption), and author attributes, to
name just a few, that were not considered in those reviews. Our article
is similar to Lord et al. (2017) in that we focus on a single journal,

W.L. Gardner, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

2



highlight some of the most-cited work, and describe the contents of the
journal using theoretical themes, but our approach is markedly dif-
ferent as we comprehensively code each article (albeit in a much
shorter time frame) and weight each article in a dispassionate manner
in our content analysis.

We are able to achieve increased scope, as compared to other re-
views through more focus (a single journal) and by reduced scale
(coding a decade of articles rather than 13, 14, 28 or 99 years). We also
differentiate our review by noting that Dinh et al. (2014) and Meuser
et al. (2016) have 2012 and 2013 respectively as their end-of-analysis
years. So, our sample periods have relatively little overlap. Collectively,
our review is substantially differentiated from other recent reviews of
the literature not only in scope and focus, but also by the time period
reviewed. Finally, because our review of LQ's third decade follows a
similar approach to that of the reviews for its first and second decades,
we can report on trends in this journal over a third point in time.

Having situated the current review of LQ's most recent decade in the
context of prior decade reviews and recent reviews of the leadership
literature, we turn to a description of the approach and content of this
review. Multiple methods were used to prepare this review including
quantitative techniques and qualitative analyses. Our content analysis
examines the type of article (theory, empirical, and methods), con-
tributors (gender, discipline, institutional affiliation, and location),
theoretical foundations, research strategies, sample type, data collec-
tion measures and methods, and analytical procedures across the
decade. Embedded in this discussion are an assessment of the top in-
stitutional contributors; the number, focus, and role of special issues;
and a citation analysis of the decade's most cited articles. Following
from the content analysis, we provide summary-level observations
about the content and trajectory of research published in LQ over the
most recent decade, comparing that to the previous two decades of LQ.
We conclude with directions for future research by revisiting the re-
commendations offered in the prior LQ decade reviews and assess the
extent to which those recommendations have been fulfilled by the field.
We also share observations from the three scholars who served as edi-
tors during LQ's third decade on the trends in the topics and methods
used to extend our knowledge of leadership theory and practice.

Methods

We coded many of the variables found in the Lowe and Gardner
(2000), Gardner et al. (2010), and Dinh et al. (2014) reviews, while
adding some new features. We coded article type, expanding on the
typology of Dinh et al. (2014): qualitative, quantitative, theory,
method, special issue, and review issue. We utilized a slightly modified
version of the Gardner et al. typology of methods as expanded by Dinh
et al.: computer simulation, content analysis, diary study/experience
sampling method (ESM), lab experiment, field study (primary data),
field survey (secondary data), field experiment, experimental simula-
tion, quasi-experiment, judgment task, meta-analysis (quantitative re-
view), and review (non-meta-analysis), to which we added convenience
sampling, interviews, observation, and archival data. Rather than use
the Gardner et al. case study/qualitative study category, we employed
the expanded typology of Cresswell and Poth (2018, p. 82) for quali-
tative designs: 1) narrative, 2) phenomenological, 3) grounded theory, 4)
ethnographic, and 5) case study. We followed the quantitative analytical
method typology employed by Scandura and Williams (2000), Gardner
et al. (2010), and Dinh et al. (2014). Specifically, we coded for whether
the article used: 1) simple statistics only (e.g., correlation); 2) analysis
of variance (ANOVA/MANOVA) or analysis of covariance (ANCOVA/
MANCOVA); 3) computer simulations (e.g., bootstrapping studies); 4)
linear regression; 5) linear techniques for categorical dependent vari-
ables; 6) structural equation modeling (SEM)/path analysis; 7) mul-
tiple-levels-of analysis techniques (e.g., hierarchical linear modeling
[HLM], Multi-level SEM [MSEM]); 8) meta-analytic techniques (e.g.,
Hunter & Schmidt, 2004); 9) non-parametric techniques; and 10) time

series/event history techniques (e.g., latent growth or change mod-
eling). After an initial round of coding, we expanded this typology to
include: 11) two-stage least squares (2SLS; (Antonakis, Bendahan,
Jacquart, & Lalive, 2010)); 12) (social) network analyses (e.g., com-
puting network centrality and/or using UCINET); 13) curvilinear ana-
lyses (e.g., Edwards & Cable, 2009); and 14) dominance/relative weight
analysis.

New to this decade review, we elected to explore construct validation
over the last decade. For this reason, we moved and separated factor
analysis into two categories: 1) confirmatory factor analysis (CFA); and
2) exploratory factor analysis (EFA). To this, we added: 3) internal
consistency reliability estimates (e.g., Cronbach's alpha); 4) interrater
reliability (IRR); 5) rwg (James, Demaree, & Wolfe, 1984); 6) ICC(1)
(Bliese, Halverson, & Schriesheim, 2002); 7) ICC(2) (Bliese et al., 2002);
8) within and between analysis (WABA; Yammarino, 1998); 9) test/
retest reliability; 10) split-half reliability; 11) Cohen's kappa, 12) con-
sensus coding. We also coded: 1) convergent, 2) discriminant, 3) face,
and 4) predictive validities, but only if the authors discussed these
explicitly. We recorded if the authors reported reliability information for:
1) all relevant variables, 2) only some relevant variables, or if reliability
was 3) not applicable for some or 4) not applicable for all variables.
Continuing the trend of interest in measures, we also recorded if the
authors reported employing: 1) existing measures, 2) modified existing
measures, 3) a new measure created for the study, 4) difference scores,
or 5) unobtrusive measures.

Another new feature of our review that differentiates it from others
involves coding where, when, and from whom authors acquired their
data. We develop the following data source typology: 1) self/focal (e.g.,
self-rated personality or performance); 2) peer of focal (e.g., questions
about a co-worker who is not a supervisor or subordinate); 3) follower
of focal (e.g., leader-rated follower performance); 4) leader of focal
(e.g., employee reporting about a supervisor); 5) family of focal (e.g.,
spouse of an employee, as one might find in work-family conflict re-
search); 6) customer of focal (e.g., emotional contagion spreading from
leader to employee to customer); 7) company archival records (e.g.,
annual report or turnover data); 8) third-party archival records (e.g., a
public database or newspaper); 9) (expert) rater provided (e.g., parti-
cipants responding after watching a video, experts rating team inter-
actions); and when the referent in question is the 10) team or 11) or-
ganization. We also coded from which country the sample was drawn.
We coded when these data were collected using the following typology: 1)
cross-sectional (all data collected at one time point); 2) cross sectional
with a time lag (e.g., follower rating leader at Time 1, leader rating
follower at Time 2 a few weeks later in time), or 3); longitudinal (re-
peated measures over time and hypothesized/expected change). Our
sample type typology is: 1) private/company (e.g., Fortune 500 or en-
trepreneurial entity); 2) public (e.g., government, municipal, or edu-
cation); 3), military; 4) health care; 5) non-governmental organization
(NGO); 6) purpose/theoretical sampling (e.g., where a specific popu-
lation is targeted because the phenomenon of interest is present or re-
levant in that population); 7) snowball sampling; 8) MTurk; 9) Qualtrics
panel; 10) other online third party sampling tool; 11) undergraduate
non-working students, 12) undergraduate working students; 13) grad-
uate/MBA non-working students; or 14) graduate/MBA working stu-
dents, or 15) sample not reported. In student samples, we recorded the
percent of working students when that information was available;
student samples where work was not mentioned were coded as non-
working.

For leadership theory, we employed the taxonomy provided in
Meuser et al. (2016), which is available on the Journal of Management's
website as supplemental material (https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/
suppl/10.1177/0149206316647099). This built on the taxonomies in
Lowe and Gardner (2000), which Gardner et al. (2010), and Dinh et al.
(2014) expanded and refined. We coded the primary leadership theory,
which we call the focal theory, present in the article. Like Meuser et al.,
we found that some articles employed an integrated view such that no

W.L. Gardner, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

3

https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/suppl/10.1177/0149206316647099
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/suppl/10.1177/0149206316647099


single theory was focal, and these were coded as such.
We also recorded author affiliations and locations as given in the

article, as well as author gender and discipline in order to explore the
composition of authorship teams. We acknowledge that gender was
coded in a binary fashion (male/female) for this research. Finally, to
ascertain the extent to which the composition of LQ's editorial team
leadership reflects the type of diversity of disciplines and international
backgrounds that the founding editors sought to achieve (Lowe &
Gardner, 2000), we collected information on the disciplines, institu-
tions, and roles of the scholars who served as an Associate Editor (AE)
for LQ during its third decade (see Table 1).

Editorial leadership of LQ in its third decade

Three scholars served as the Editor-in-Chief of LQ during its third
decade: Michael (Mike) Mumford, Leanne Atwater, and John
Antonakis. Mike Mumford took over from Jerry Hunt in 2005 and
served as editor during a pivotal period of LQ's development, as he
oversaw a sizable increase in submissions (from roughly 80 per year to
250), increases in the number of articles published, special issues on a
range of diverse topics (e.g. destructive leadership, team leadership,
crisis leadership, and spiritual/authentic leadership), and substantial
increases in the impact factor (from 1.75 in 2005 to 2.90 in 2010). The

journal also became more international and embraced a growing di-
versity of theoretical perspectives and methods (Mumford, 2005;
Mumford, 2011). All of the AEs were United States citizens by birth,
and reflected the disciplines of management, psychology, and philo-
sophy by training. A complete summary of the disciplines, institutions,
roles, and years of appointment for all scholars who served as AEs
during LQ's third decade is provided in Table 1.

Leanne Atwater assumed the role of Editor-in-Chief in 2011 and
served in that role until 2016 (Atwater, 2011; Atwater, 2016). During
her tenure she introduced several innovations, including automated
submission and review process, changes to roles and responsibilities of
the AEs (see Table 1), and a further increase in the size and interna-
tional composition of the Editorial Review Board. In addition, the
number of submissions continued to grow rapidly, increasing from 361
in 2012 to 688 in 2015 (70% of which came from outside the U.S.),
while acceptance rates declined from 16% in 2012 to 8% in 2015.
During Atwater's tenure, LQ continued to publish high-quality special
issues on relevant topics such as cognition, emotion, gender, network
approaches, biology, Asian models, and longitudinal studies (see
Table 2; discussed further in the Special Issues section). Finally, during
her tenure five LQ articles were “retracted to protect the integrity of the
scientific record” (Atwater, Mumford, Schriesheim, & Yammarino,
2014, p. 1174). The explanation of the reasons for and the process used

Table 1
Associate editors of the Leadership Quarterly (2010–2019).

Name Discipline/sub-discipline Institution Role Years of service

Francis J. Yammarino Management/leadership State University of New York at Binghamton AE/yearly review editor 2010
Peter Dorfman Management/leadership New Mexico State University AE/theoretical and practitioner

letters
2010

Cynthia McCauley IO psychology/leadership Center for Creative Leadership AE/theoretical and practitioner
letters

2010

Barbara Crosby Leadership University of Minnesota AE/social sciences studies 2010
Ron Riggio Psychology/leadership Claremont McKenna College AE/social sciences studies 2010–2013
Joanne Ciulla Philosophy/leadership ethics University of Richmond AE/philosophy, ethics and the

humanities
2010

David V. Day IO psychology/leadership University of Western Australia; Claremont McKenna
College

AE/assessment, evaluation and
design

2010/2017–2019

David Waldman IO psychology/leadership Arizona State University AE/contemporary leadership 2010
Craig L. Pearce Management/leadership Claremont Graduate University AE/contemporary leadership 2010
John Antonakis Management/leadership; RM University of Lausanne AE 2011–2016
Shelley Dionne OB/leadership Binghamton University AE 2011–2016
Kevin B. Lowe Business/leadership The University of Auckland/University of North Carolina

at Greensboro/The University of Sydney
AE 2011–2019

Chester A. Schriesheim Management/leadership University of Miami AE/yearly review editor 2011–2016
William Gardner Business/leadership Texas Tech University AE 2013–2019
Stephanie L. Castro OB/leadership Florida Atlantic University AE 2014–2016
Michael Cole Management/RM Texas Christian University AE 2015–2019
Olga Epitropaki Management/leadership The American College of Greece/Durham University AE 2015–2019
Dusya Vera Business/strategy University of Houston AE 2016–2019
Seth M. Spain IO psychology/personality Concordia University SAE 2017–2019
Mark van Vugt Psychology/evolutionary

psychology
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam SAE 2017–2019

Alice H. Eagly Psychology/gender psychology Northwestern University AE 2017–2019
Alex Haslam Psychology/social psychology University of Queensland AE 2017–2019
Michael Hogg Psychology/social identity Claremont Graduate University AE 2017–2019
Ronit Kark Psychology/leadership Bar-Ilan University AE 2017–2019
Philip M. Podsakoff Business/leadership; RM University of Florida AE 2017–2019
Rolf van Dick Psychology/social psychology Goethe University AE 2017–2018
Roberto Weber Economics/behavioral and

experimental economics
University of Zurich AE 2017–2019

Nicolas Bastardoz Business and economics/RM University of Zurich AE and methods advisor 2017–2019
George C. Banks Management/leadership University of North Carolina at Charlotte SAE 2018–2019
Janka I. Stoker OB/leadership University of Groningen SAE 2018–2019
Roseanne Foti IO psychology Virginia Tech University AE 2019
Janaki Gooty Management University of North Carolina at Charlotte AE 2019
Renee B. Adams Finance University of Oxford AE 2019
Philippe Jacquart Management/RM Emlyon Business School AE and methods advisor 2019
Niels van Quaquebeke Social psychology/leadership Kuhne Logistics University AE 2019

Note. RM = Research Methods; AE = Associate Editor; SAE = Senior Associate Editor

W.L. Gardner, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

4



in issuing these retractions is described in an editorial by Atwater et al.
(2014). Mirroring procedures put in place across much of the social
sciences, the ultimate consequence of the retractions has been a re-
commitment to ensuring the rigor and accuracy of research published in
LQ through a number of refinements to journal review processes
(Antonakis, 2017, a), as described below.

John Antonakis has served as the Editor-in-Chief from 2017 to the
present. He is the first LQ editor to hail from a continent other than
North America. Indeed, his background is truly unique as he is “the first
European editor in chief, a Swiss who is U.S. trained, having a South
African accent and a Greek surname (go figure!)” (Antonakis, 2017, a).
Additionally, he again expanded the number of AEs to include “five
senior associate editors and nine associate editors, and a junior as-
sociate editor3 that assists with article screening” and the size of the
editorial board (adding more than 30 members), while further in-
creasing the disciplinary and cultural diversity represented among its
members (Antonakis, 2017, a). Disciplines that are represented within
the editorial leadership for the first time through the appointment of
AEs with significant expertise in these fields include behavioral eco-
nomics, political science, evolutionary and biological psychology, social
psychology, research methods, and strategy and organization theory
(see Table 1). In addition, greater international representation is ap-
parent among the AEs, with scholars from Europe and Australia, in
addition to North America.

Antonakis also instituted several changes to LQ's policies and pro-
cesses. He expanded the types of articles that LQ publishes to in-
clude—in addition to full length articles, LQ Yearly Review of Leadership
articles, and special issue articles—short communications, commen-
taries of published articles, and research proposals (registered reports
and results-masked articles). He initially increased the desk reject rate
from the 50% level of the prior editorial team to roughly 70%, to “use
editorial and reviewer resources wisely and efficiently” (Antonakis,
2017, a). At the same time, he charged AEs to “spend their time making
substantive and constructive comments on manuscripts with potential.”

Further, in a section of a position paper (Antonakis, 2017, b) titled,
“How to make a more useful contribution to the research record,” he
challenged submitting authors to strive to make more meaningful
contributions through “better theorizing, not ignoring endogeneity,
designing realistic experiments, conducting rigorous qualitative re-
search, declaring conflicts of interest, being transparent with data,
methods and reporting, and being an honest broker” (Antonakis, 2017,
a). Finally, prior to an empirical manuscript being accepted, the
Methods Advisor AE now conducts a check “to ensure that reporting
guidelines are followed, that there are no flaws in reporting and ana-
lysis, and that limitations are transparently reported” and hence the
manuscript is “squeaky clean” (Antonakis et al., 2019, p. 5).

Early returns on these changes are quite positive, as LQ's impact
factor has risen from 3.31 in 2016 to 5.63 in 2018. This impact factor
places LQ 6th among applied psychology journals and 18th among
management journals in the most recent rankings (2019 Release of
Journal Citation Reports; https://clarivate.com/webofsciencegroup/
solutions/journal-citation-reports/). Additionally, analyses in a recent
“State of the Journal” editorial indicate that citations to LQ articles
within management, applied psychology, and outside disciplines (e.g.,
economics, political science, industrial engineering, nursing, computer
science, social psychology, medicine, public administration, hospitality,
leisure, sport and tourism) are increasing rapidly and at rates that
compare favorably with those of other and more established manage-
ment and applied psychology top tier journals (Antonakis et al., 2019).
However, what matters most to the leadership of LQ is not impact factor
per se, which, despite its flaws, is used extensively to judge journal
quality; instead, “[w]hat we care most about is to ensure that we report
on how leadership works by publishing quality science; science that is
robust, creative, and will make a difference” (p. 4).

All three of LQ's editors during LQ's third decade identified a goal to
increase both the size and the diversity of LQ's editorial board. An ex-
amination of changes in the size and composition of the board over the
past decade suggests that some progress in achieving this goal has been
made. During the decade, the size of the board increased from 73 to 162
members, while the percentage of female members increased from
approximately 30 to 36%. The geographic representation of the board
has also expanded. In 2010, scholars from the United States and

Table 2
Special issue topics.

Year Volume Issue Topic Editor(s)

Forthcoming Leadership in the digital era: Social media, big data, virtual reality,
computational methods, and deep learning

Banks, G.C., Dionne, S.D., Sayama, H., Schmid Mast, M.

Forthcoming Evolution and biology of leadership: A new synthesis van Vugt, M., von Rueden, C.
Forthcoming Economics and leadership Garretsen H., Stoker J., Weber R.
Forthcoming Strategic leadership and strategic management Bonardi, J., Hitt, M.A., Vera, D., Withers, M.C.
Forthcoming 21st century leadership development: bridging science and practice Day, D., Riggio, R., Conger, J., Tan, S.
Forthcoming Replication and rigorous retesting of leadership models Clapp-Smith, R., Carsten, M., Gooty, J., Connelly, S., Haslam, A.,

Bastardoz, N, Spain, S.
Forthcoming Social identity and leadership Hogg, M.A., Haslam, S.A., Rast, D.E., Steffens, N.K., Gaffney,

A.M.
Forthcoming Leader power: rigorous insights on its causes and consequences Sturm, R.E., Hertz, H., Antonakis, J.
2017 28 4 Charisma: new frontiers. A special issue dedicated to the memory of Boas

Shamir
Antonakis, J., Gardner, W.L.

2017 28 2 Dynamic viewpoints on implicit leadership and followership theories Foti, R.J., Hansborough, T.K, Epitropaki, O., Coyle, P.T.
2016 27 3 Gender and leadership Eagly, A.H., Heilman, M.E.
2016 27 2 Collective and network approaches to leadership Cullen-Lester, K.L., Yammarino, F.J.
2015 26 4 Leadership and emotions Connelly, S., Gooty, J.
2015 26 3 Leader cognition Mumford, M.
2015 26 1 Asian models of leadership Arvey, R., Dhanaraj, C., Javidan, M., Zhang, Z.
2014 25 1 Leadership Quarterly 25th anniversary issue Yammarino, F.J.
2013 24 3 Leader integrity
2012 23 4 Leadership and individual differences Antonakis, J., Day, D.V., Schyns, B.
2012 23 2 Biology of leadership Senior, C., Lee, N., Butler, M.
2011 22 3 Longitudinal studies of leadership development Riggio, R.E., Mumford, M.
2010 21 4 Leadership development evaluation Hannum, K.M., Craig, S.B.
2010 21 2 Public integrative leadership: Multiple turns of the kaleidoscope Crosby, B.C., Bryson, J.M.

3 The title Junior Associate Editor no longer exists. It was replaced with
Associate Editor and Methods Advisor

W.L. Gardner, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

5

https://clarivate.com/webofsciencegroup/solutions/journal-citation-reports/
https://clarivate.com/webofsciencegroup/solutions/journal-citation-reports/


Canada, respectively, composed 76% and 2.7% of the board members
versus 59.9% and 2.5% in 2019. Conversely, regions experiencing
greater representation include Europe (10.7%), with the Netherlands,
United Kingdom, Norway, Switzerland, and Finland increasing (27.2%)
and scholars from Germany, Denmark, Sweden, France, Spain, Slovenia
and Portugal added (though Norway and Finland are no longer re-
presented). Australia/New Zealand is also more represented (5.3% in
2010 vs. 6.7% in 2019). The Middle East, formerly represented only by
Israel (5.3% in 2010), is now represented by Israel and Lebanon (2.5%
in 2018). Unrepresented in 2010, Asia, is represented by the countries
of Singapore and Turkey (1.2%) in 2019. Through these changes, LQ
has moved closer to fulfilling the vision of the founding editors to be a
global outlet for leadership research.

What has LQ published in its third decade and by whom?

Number and types of articles

Next, we investigated the number and mix of article types by year
(Table 3). The second decade of LQ showed a marked increase in
publications over the first decade (from 34 to 62); the number of arti-
cles in the third decade remained constant on average (61.5 per year) as
compared to the second decade. As Gardner et al. (2010) noted, the
increase from the first to second decade reflects the move from four to
six volumes per year. We found a large range of published articles per
year within the decade. 2011 showed the largest number of published
articles (79) and 2019 the smallest (41). Moreover, 2015 and earlier
showed significantly more published articles than 2016 to present
(average of 71 vs. 47.25 per year). January 2017 corresponds to a
change in editorship, with John Antonakis taking over for Leanne At-
water, who concluded her term in December 2016. As previously noted,
John Antonakis increased the proportion of desk rejects, producing a
reduction in the number of articles published and an increase in rigor.

Overall, 69.4% of articles involved quantitative exploration of
phenomena, followed by qualitative (10.4%), theory (15.1%), and
methods (4.4%) articles. Membership in these categories is not mu-
tually exclusive. For example, an article could involve a mixed methods
approach, employing both qualitative and quantitative exploration
techniques. These percentages show a marked change from 2000 to
2010, where theoretical articles accounted for 42.0%. Methods articles

continued to decline, suggesting, as Gardner et al. (2010) did, that
editors may wish to stimulate methods-related submissions when this
type of scholarship is called for to advance the exploration of a phe-
nomenon. Alternatively, it may be that the reason why methods-or-
iented articles have declined is that there is now an organization studies
journal devoted to publishing methods-oriented articles–Organizational
Research Methods. While the number and proportion of articles in re-
view issues remains stable (54/15.0% in the prior decade; 89/14.5%
currently), the number of special issue articles has remained similar but
the proportion has decreased markedly (109/31.0% in the prior decade;
112/18.2% currently). Review issues continue to be highly cited, as two
of the top three most cited articles of the decade (see Table 4) were
published in this forum.

Special issues

Special issues (Table 2) represent a significant investment of journal
resources in a topic area. In total, there were 22 special issues published
or initiated during the decade, which is an increase from nine and 17 in
the prior two decades, respectively. The diversity of topics reflect many
emerging areas of leadership methods and research, including the
Biology of Leadership (Lee, Senior, & Butler, 2012), Asian Models of
Leadership (Arvey, Dhanaraj, Javidan, & Zhang, 2015), Collective and
Network Approaches to Leadership (Cullen-Lester & Yammarino,
2016), Leadership and Economics (Garretsen, Stoker, & Weber, 2017),
and Leadership in the Digital Era (Banks, Dionne, Sayama, & Mast,
2019). The variety of these special issue topics demonstrates a con-
tinuing commitment to the vision of LQ's founders to advance leader-
ship knowledge through multi- and interdisciplinary research (Lowe &
Gardner, 2000).

In their review of LQ's second decade, Gardner et al. (2010) noted
that the proliferation of LQ special issues was part of a larger trend
across top management journals identified by Olk and Griffith (2004).
Drawing from archival data and interviews with journal editors, Olk
and Griffith collected data on the quality and impact of special issues
for five top tier management journals (Academy of Management Journal,
Academy of Management Review, Administrative Science Quarterly, Stra-
tegic Management Journal, and Organization Science). Gardner et al.
(2010) observed that the proportion of LQ special issues published
during the journal's second decade (30.3%) was roughly equivalent to

Table 3
Article type.

Year/article count Volume Qualitative Quantitative Theory Methods Special issue Review issue Total

2010 21 17 44 4 9 15 9 98
68 11.1% 25.0% 64.7% 5.9% 13.2% 22.1% 13.2% 12.1%
2011 22 14 49 24 3 9 8 107
79 12.8% 17.7% 62.0% 30.4% 3.8% 11.4% 10.1% 13.2%
2012 23 3 59 7 7 13 9 98
80 13.0% 3.8% 73.8% 8.8% 8.8% 16.3% 11.3% 12.1%
2013 24 3 45 6 1 6 8 69
61 9.9% 4.9% 73.8% 9.8% 1.6% 9.8% 13.1% 8.5%
2014 25 8 52 4 3 7 7 81
68 11.1% 11.8% 76.5% 5.9% 4.4% 10.3% 10.3% 10.0%
2015 26 8 55 6 0 29 12 110
70 11.4% 11.4% 78.6% 8.6% 0.0% 41.4% 17.1% 13.5%
2016 27 5 45 8 0 21 0 79
55 8.9% 9.1% 81.8% 14.5% 0.0% 38.2% 0.0% 9.7%
2017 28 2 22 13 1 12 13 63
45 7.3% 4.4% 48.9% 28.9% 2.2% 26.7% 28.9% 7.8%
2018 29 3 30 9 0 0 14 56
48 7.8% 6.3% 62.5% 18.8% 0.0% 0.0% 29.2% 6.9%
2019 30 1 26 12 3 0 9 51
41 6.7% 2.4% 63.4% 29.3% 7.3% 0.0% 22.0% 0.0%
Total 64 427 93 27 112 89 812
Total % 10.4% 69.4% 15.1% 4.4% 18.2% 14.5%

Note: N = 615 articles; average number of articles per year = 61.5.

W.L. Gardner, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

6



Table 4
Top 50 highly cited papers.

Rank
cites/year

Cites/year Rank cites Total cites Year Vol Issue Authors Title Type Focal theory Content

1 76.7 1 690 2010 21 6 Antonakis J., Bendahan S.,
Jacquart P., Lalive R.

On making causal claims: A review and recommendations Review None Empirical, method,
review issue

2 68.6 2 343 2014 25 1 Dinh J.E., Lord R.G., Gardner
W.L., Meuser J.D., Liden R.C., Hu
J.

Leadership theory and research in the new millennium:
Current theoretical trends and changing perspectives

Review None Empirical, special
issue

6 41.5 3 332 2011 22 6 Gardner W.L., Cogliser C.C., Davis
K.M., Dickens M.P.

Authentic leadership: A review of the literature and research
agenda

Review Authentic leadership Theory, review issue

7 36.3 4 290 2011 22 5 Rosing K., Frese M., Bausch A. Explaining the heterogeneity of the leadership-innovation
relationship: Ambidextrous leadership

Article Entrepreneurial Empirical, theory

5 46.5 5 279 2013 24 1 Schyns B., Schilling J. How bad are the effects of bad leaders? A meta-analysis of
destructive leadership and its outcomes

Article Destructive leadership Empirical

3 52.8 6 264 2014 25 1 Day D.V., Fleenor J.W., Atwater
L.E., Sturm R.E., McKee R.A.

Advances in leader and leadership development: A review of
25 years of research and theory

Review Leadership development Special issue

4 49.4 7 247 2014 25 1 Uhl-Bien M., Riggio R.E., Lowe
K.B., Carsten M.K.

Followership theory: A review and research agenda Review Followership theory Special issue

11 26.8 8 214 2011 22 1 Tims M., Bakker A.B.,
Xanthopoulou D.

Do transformational leaders enhance their followers' daily
work engagement?

Article Transformational leadership
theory

Empirical

12 25.8 9 206 2011 22 1 Kalshoven K., Den Hartog D.N.,
De Hoogh A.H.B.

Ethical leadership at work questionnaire (ELW):
Development and validation of a multidimensional measure

Article Ethical leadership theory Empirical, qualitative

13 22.6 10 203 2010 21 1 Liu W., Zhu R., Yang Y. I warn you because I like you: Voice behavior, employee
identifications, and transformational leadership

Article Transformational leadership
theory

Empirical

9 32.5 11 195 2013 24 1 Braun S., Peus C., Weisweiler S.,
Frey D.

Transformational leadership, job satisfaction, and team
performance: A multilevel mediation model of trust

Article Transformational leadership
theory

Empirical

15 20.1 12 181 2010 21 6 Gooty J., Connelly S., Griffith J.,
Gupta A.

Leadership, affect and emotions: A state of the science review Review Emotions & leadership Review issue

18 18.1 13 163 2010 21 3 Carsten M.K., Uhl-Bien M., West
B.J., Patera J.L., McGregor R.

Exploring social constructions of followership: A qualitative
study

Article Followership theory Empirical, qualitative

22 16.0 14 144 2010 21 1 Ladkin D., Taylor S.S. Enacting the ‘true self’: Towards a theory of embodied
authentic leadership

Article Authentic leadership Theory

23 15.7 15 141 2010 21 6 Fleenor J.W., Smither J.W.,
Atwater L.E., Braddy P.W., Sturm
R.E.

Self-other rating agreement in leadership: A review Review None Method, review issue

24 15.6 16 140 2010 21 2 Crosby B.C., Bryson J.M. Integrative leadership and the creation and maintenance of
cross-sector collaborations

Article (Public) integrative leadership Empirical, qualitative,
theory, special issue

24 15.6 16 140 2010 21 3 Norman S.M., Avolio B.J., Luthans
F.

The impact of positivity and transparency on trust in leaders
and their perceived effectiveness

Article Authentic leadership Empirical

27 15.2 18 137 2010 21 4 Hoppe B., Reinelt C. Social network analysis and the evaluation of leadership
networks

Article Leadership development Method, special issue

31 14.2 19 128 2010 21 6 Gardner W.L., Lowe K.B., Moss
T.W., Mahoney K.T., Cogliser C.C.

Scholarly leadership of the study of leadership: A review of
The Leadership Quarterly's second decade, 2000–2009

Review None Empirical, qualitative,
review issue

17 18.1 20 127 2012 23 3 Volmer J., Spurk D., Niessen C. Leader-member exchange (LMX), job autonomy, and creative
work involvement

Article LMX Empirical

28 15.1 21 121 2011 22 6 Neider L.L., Schriesheim C.A. The Authentic Leadership Inventory (ALI): Development and
empirical tests

Article Authentic leadership Empirical, method,
review issue

30 14.6 22 117 2011 22 6 Van Knippenberg D. Embodying who we are: Leader group prototypicality and
leadership effectiveness

Review Social identity theory of
leadership

Theory, review issue

20 16.3 23 114 2012 23 6 Fairhurst G.T., Uhl-Bien M. Organizational discourse analysis (ODA): Examining
leadership as a relational process

Review Relational leadership Method, review issue

33 13.9 24 111 2011 22 4 Gao L., Janssen O., Shi K. Leader trust and employee voice: The moderating role of
empowering leader behaviors

Article Participative, shared leadership,
delegation and empowerment

Empirical

16 18.2 25 109 2013 24 2 Hunter E.M., Neubert M.J., Perry
S.J., Witt L.A., Penney L.M.,
Weinberger E.

Servant leaders inspire servant followers: Antecedents and
outcomes for employees and the organization

Article Servant leadership theory Empirical

(continued on next page)

W
.L.

G
ardner,

et
al.

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101379

7



Table 4 (continued)

Rank
cites/year

Cites/year Rank cites Total cites Year Vol Issue Authors Title Type Focal theory Content

8 36.0 26 108 2016 27 4 Banks G.C., McCauley K.D.,
Gardner W.L., Guler C.E.

A meta-analytic review of authentic and transformational
leadership: A test for redundancy

Article Authentic leadership Empirical

34 13.5 26 108 2011 22 5 Zhang A.Y., Tsui A.S., Wang D.X. Leadership behaviors and group creativity in Chinese
organizations: The role of group processes

Article Transformational leadership
theory

Empirical

26 15.3 28 107 2012 23 1 Biemann T., Cole M.S., Voelpel S. Within-group agreement: On the use (and misuse) of r WG
and r WG(J) in leadership research and some best practice
guidelines

Article None Method

42 11.7 29 105 2010 21 3 Cho J., Dansereau F. Are transformational leaders fair? A multi-level study of
transformational leadership, justice perceptions, and
organizational citizenship behaviors

Article Transformational leadership
theory

Empirical

42 11.7 29 105 2010 21 3 Vecchio R.P., Justin J.E., Pearce
C.L.

Empowering leadership: An examination of mediating
mechanisms within a hierarchical structure

Article Participative, shared leadership,
delegation and empowerment

Empirical

35 13.1 29 105 2011 22 6 Hernandez M., Eberly M.B.,
Avolio B.J., Johnson M.D.

The loci and mechanisms of leadership: Exploring a more
comprehensive view of leadership theory

Review None Theory, review issue

42 11.7 29 105 2010 21 1 Yang J., Mossholder K.W. Examining the effects of trust in leaders: A bases-and-foci
approach

Article None Empirical

36 13.0 33 104 2011 22 1 Vinkenburg C.J., van Engen M.L.,
Eagly A.H., Johannesen-Schmidt
M.C.

An exploration of stereotypical beliefs about leadership
styles: Is transformational leadership a route to women's
promotion?

Article Transformational leadership
theory

Empirical

29 14.7 34 103 2012 23 5 Eisenbeiss S.A. Re-thinking ethical leadership: An interdisciplinary
integrative approach

Article Ethical leadership theory Theory

37 12.9 34 103 2011 22 2 Shamir B. Leadership takes time: Some implications of (not) taking
time seriously in leadership research

Article Contextual/complexity/adaptive Theory

45 11.4 34 103 2010 21 3 Battilana J., Gilmartin M., Sengul
M., Pache A.-C., Alexander J.A.

Leadership competencies for implementing planned
organizational change

Article Behavioral approaches (OSU/
LBDQ)

Empirical

14 20.6 34 103 2014 25 3 Van Dierendonck D., Stam D.,
Boersma P., de Windt N., Alkema
J.

Same difference? Exploring the differential mechanisms
linking servant leadership and transformational leadership to
follower outcomes

Article Servant leadership theory Empirical

19 16.5 38 99 2013 24 6 Epitropaki O., Sy T., Martin R.,
Tram-Quon S., Topakas A.

Implicit leadership and followership theories “in the wild”:
Taking stock of information-processing approaches to
leadership and followership in organizational settings

Review Implicit leadership Review issue

46 11.0 38 99 2010 21 6 Shondrick S.J., Dinh J.E., Lord
R.G.

Developments in implicit leadership theory and cognitive
science: Applications to improving measurement and
understanding alternatives to hierarchical leadership

Review Implicit leadership Review issue

49 10.9 40 98 2010 21 3 Côté S., Lopes P.N., Salovey P.,
Miners C.T.H.

Emotional intelligence and leadership emergence in small
groups

Article Leadership emergence Empirical

32 14.0 40 98 2012 23 5 Carlson D., Ferguson M., Hunter
E., Whitten D.

Abusive supervision and work-family conflict: The path
through emotional labor and burnout

Article Destructive leadership Empirical

21 16.2 42 97 2013 24 1 Zhu W., Newman A., Miao Q.,
Hooke A.

Revisiting the mediating role of trust in transformational
leadership effects: Do different types of trust make a
difference?

Article Transformational leadership
theory

Empirical

10 32.0 43 96 2016 27 1 Chen A.S.-Y., Hou Y.-H. The effects of ethical leadership, voice behavior and climates
for innovation on creativity: A moderated mediation
examination

Article Ethical leadership theory Empirical

50 10.6 44 95 2010 21 4 Ely K., Boyce L.A., Nelson J.K.,
Zaccaro S.J., Hernez-Broome G.,
Whyman W.

Evaluating leadership coaching: A review and integrated
framework

Article Leadership development Empirical, qualitative,
special issue

41 11.8 45 94 2011 22 2 Harris K.J., Wheeler A.R., Kacmar
K.M.

The mediating role of organizational job embeddedness in
the LMX-outcomes relationships

Article LMX Empirical

38 12.7 46 89 2012 23 3 Cavazotte F., Moreno V.,
Hickmann M.

Effects of leader intelligence, personality and emotional
intelligence on transformational leadership and managerial
performance

Article Transformational leadership
theory

Empirical

38 12.7 46 89 2012 23 1 Sun L.-Y., Zhang Z., Qi J., Chen
Z.X.

Empowerment and creativity: A cross-level investigation Article Transformational leadership
theory

Empirical

(continued on next page)

W
.L.

G
ardner,

et
al.

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101379

8



that of Organization Science (30%), which was the highest among the
journals Olk and Griffith studied. While the proportion of special issues
(23.3%) declined during LQ's third decade, it is clear that they continue
to play a pivotal role in introducing new theories and methods to the
discipline.

From their analysis, Olk and Griffith (2004) concluded that articles
published in special issues are characterized by greater upward var-
iance in quality (more exceptional as opposed to mediocre articles) and
significantly higher citation rates than regular issues. These finding are
consistent with those obtained by Smith, Leggat, and Araki (2012), who
assessed the bibliographic performance and relative impact of a 2007
special issue from the Japanese journal, Industrial Health. Specifically,
Smith et al. (2012, p. 88) concluded “that special issues can attract
more immediate citations and more overall citations than regular issues
as well as having a positive effect on its impact factor in the years
immediately following publication.” Gardner et al. (2010) came to a
similar conclusion regarding articles published in special issues during
LQ's second decade, as they accounted for 47 of the top 100 most-cited
articles, even though they constituted only 30% of the total. However,
special issue articles appear to have been less impactful during LQ's
third decade, as only 7 of the top 50 most-cited articles (14%) appeared
in special issues. Perhaps, as the topics of LQ special issues have grown
more focused on particularized and nascent streams of research, their
appeal to a wider audience of leadership scholars has declined, at least
relative to the prior decade. However, it would be premature to con-
clude that LQ special issues are not more impactful than articles pub-
lished in regular issues. According to SCOPUS data as of December 18,
2019, special issue articles in the third decade have been cited 38.1
times on average compared to 32.7 for regular articles. To further an-
swer this question, a more systematic bibliographic analysis along the
lines of that conducted by Smith et al. (2012) is required, which is
beyond the scope of the current review. Moreover, as suggested above,
we recommend that LQ editors continue to publish special issues to help
fulfill the journal's ongoing mission to serve as the outlet for cutting
edge and multi-disciplinary leadership research.

Review issues

With the dawn of the new millennium, LQ Editor Jerry Hunt (2000)
launched the inaugural LQ Yearly Review of Leadership (LQYR). “With
this series, Jerry displayed his tremendous talent as a visionary and
leading edge thinker in bringing us a series of articles from top and
emerging scholars not only in leadership, but in other areas Jerry saw
that could inform leadership” (Uhl-Bien, 2008, p. 632).1 From the
outset, the purpose of the LQYR issue was to provide state-of-the art
coverage of a wide range of content and methodologically-oriented
pieces, to be complemented by subsequent special issues for some of the
featured topics. It was hoped that over time, a wide range of reviews
would be provided and serve as a baseline for future work by leadership
scholars and others interested in the field of leadership. "The LQYR
reviews were not designed to be encyclopedic, though some are more
encyclopedic than others, depending on the topic…they needed to have
some kind of integrating framework and generally be understandable
by both specialists and generalists…. Reviews vary in their breadth but
are representative of the topic area selected, and they cover a time
period appropriate to tie in with previous work and provide a re-
presentative picture of where the topic stands" (Hunt, 2000, p. 432).

A summary of the year, volume, issue, title, editor, and themes of
the LQYR issues published in LQ's third decade is provided in Table 5.
Note that from its inception in 2000 until 2017, the LQYR issue ap-
peared in the last issue of the volume, which was Issue 4 until the
number of issues expanded to six in 2002. Hence, the first six LQYR

T
ab
le

4
(c
on
tin
ue
d)

R
an

k
ci

te
s/

ye
ar

C
it

es
/y

ea
r

R
an

k
ci

te
s

To
ta

l
ci

te
s

Y
ea

r
V

ol
Is

su
e

A
ut

ho
rs

Ti
tl

e
Ty

pe
Fo

ca
l

th
eo

ry
C

on
te

nt

46
11

.0
48

88
20

11
22

1
W

an
g

H
.,

Ts
ui

A
.S

.,
X

in
K

.R
.

C
EO

le
ad

er
sh

ip
be

ha
vi

or
s,

or
ga

ni
za

ti
on

al
pe

rf
or

m
an

ce
,

an
d

em
pl

oy
ee

s'
at

ti
tu

de
s

A
rt

ic
le

St
ra

te
gi

c
Em

pi
ri

ca
l,

qu
al

it
at

iv
e

46
11

.0
48

88
20

11
22

3
H

ar
m

s
P.

D
.,

Sp
ai

n
S.

M
.,

H
an

na
h

S.
T.

Le
ad

er
de

ve
lo

pm
en

t
an

d
th

e
da

rk
si

de
of

pe
rs

on
al

it
y

A
rt

ic
le

Le
ad

er
sh

ip
de

ve
lo

pm
en

t
Em

pi
ri

ca
l,

sp
ec

ia
l

is
su

e
40

12
.3

50
86

20
12

23
3

Pi
cc

ol
o

R
.F

.,
B

on
o

J.
E.

,H
ei

ni
tz

K
.,

R
ow

ol
d

J.
,

D
ue

hr
E.

,
Ju

dg
e

T.
A

.
Th

e
re

la
ti

ve
im

pa
ct

of
co

m
pl

em
en

ta
ry

le
ad

er
be

ha
vi

or
s:

W
hi

ch
m

at
te

r
m

os
t?

A
rt

ic
le

N
on

e
Em

pi
ri

ca
l

1 Jerry Hunt served as the LQYR Editor from 2000 to 2007; Mary Uhl-Bien
succeeded him and served as LQYR Editor in 2008 and 2009.

W.L. Gardner, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

9



issues of LQ's third decade appeared in Issue 6. However, with the
change of editors from Leanne Atwater to John Antonakis in 2017,
Antonakis decided to publish the LQYR in Issue 1, where it has ap-
peared every year thereafter. As such, no LQYR issue was published in
2016.

For the first decade (2000–2009) of the LQYR, each issue included
reviews on a diverse set of substantive topics, and hence they did not
reflect a theme per se. However, the 2010 issue edited by Fran
Yammarino (2010), served as a scholarly tribute to two prominent
leadership scholars and former LQ Editors – Bernard M. (Bernie) Bass
and Jerry Hunt, who had recently passed away. From 2011 to 2015,
Chet Schriesheim served as the LQYR editor; in 2012, he introduced a
theme for the first time, as the LQYR focused on methodological ad-
vances in leadership research (Schriesheim, 2012). The next two LQYR
issues likewise had a thematic focus, as both featured articles that ad-
vanced traditional leadership theory and research (Schriesheim, 2013,
2014). None of the subsequent LQYR issues have had a thematic focus.
However, the last three edited by Shelley Dionne and David Day, re-
spectively, reflect “multi-disciplinary, multilevel, multisource, multi-
skilled and multigenerational perspectives” (Dionne, 2017, p. 22), and
seek to push the “frontiers of leadership scholarship” (Day, 2018, p. 1),
through “state-of-the science reviews of leadership theory, methods,
and measurement” (Day, 2019, p. 10). Over the years, this “series has
become a cornerstone of LQ, and the impact is demonstrated by the fact
that, since its inception, LQYR articles have been regular recipients of
the Best Paper Award in LQ” making it “a noble endeavor” and an
ongoing tribute to Jerry Hunt's legacy (Uhl-Bien, 2008, p. 632). It is also
noteworthy that a disproportionate number of LQYR articles (11/22%)
are included among the 50 most highly cited articles discussed in the
next section (see Table 4), providing further evidence of their impact.
Review issue articles in the third decade of LQ were cited 43.3 times per
article on average compared to 32.7 for regular articles. This finding is
also consistent with Antonakis, Bastardoz, Liu, and Schriesheim's
(2014) conclusion that articles published in review issues tend to be
highly cited (although they have high variance), as are quantitative,
theory, and methods articles.

Most cited articles

Following Gardner et al.'s (2010) example, we compiled a list of the
most highly cited articles of those published during LQ's third decade
(see Table 4). Here, we report the total citations, citations per year, and
the rank for each article. The most highly cited article is a LQYR
methods review on causal claims (Antonakis et al., 2010), suggesting
that scholars recognize and appreciate methods articles (Antonakis
et al., 2014), even though there were not a large number of these
published in LQ during the last decade. This particular methods article
has been highly impactful because it highlights endogeneity issues that
negate the ability of authors to make causal inferences about focal re-
lationships, but also introduces corrective actions for addressing

endogeneity issues to the leadership field. 2010 ranks first in the
number of most highly-cited articles (17), followed by 2011 (14), 2012
(eight), 2013 (five), and 2014 (four). With the exception of 2016 (two),
the last half of the decade is absent from this list, most likely because
insufficient time has passed for citations of these articles to accumulate.
With regards to the leadership theories reflected in highly-cited articles,
19 theories are present. Transformational leadership dominates the
most-cited list with nine articles focused on its premises. Authentic
leadership is second with five articles, followed by leadership devel-
opment (four), ethical leadership (three), and two articles each for
destructive leadership, implicit leadership, leader-member exchange
(LMX), servant leadership, followership theory, and participative/
shared leadership/delegation and empowerment.

Institutional contributions and authorship teams

We investigated the composition and diversity of authorship teams
from the perspective of gender, team size, affiliations, world regions,
and how articles, authors, and authorships are distributed across world
regions. In order to account for authors who publish multiple papers in
LQ, we define authorships as the number of papers on which a person is
an author.

Regarding gender, 58.3% of authors were male versus 41.7% fe-
male; 61.4% of authorships were male versus 38.6% female. Thus,
males are more likely to have published more than once versus females.
We noticed that some leadership theories seem to be preferred pub-
lication topics based on gender. For example, 73.8% and 67.6% of the
authorships on articles which focused on charismatic leadership and
participative/shared leadership/delegation and empowerment were
male, while 61.6%, 59.6%, and 53.3% of the authorships on articles
that focused on leadership development, leadership and diversity, and
identity and identification processes, respectively, were female.

Author team size varied widely between one and ten authors. Three-
author teams were most common (31.4% of articles), followed by two-
author teams (25.5%), four-author teams (18.4%), five-author teams
(9.4%), and single-author papers (8.0%). Author teams of six to 10
authors accounted for 7% of papers. The author teams drew from one to
seven affiliations, with author teams from two affiliations most
common (38.4%), followed by single-affiliation articles (27.6%), arti-
cles representing three affiliations (21.6%), and articles with four af-
filiations (9.1%). Articles with five to seven affiliations represented
2.9% of papers. These affiliations span 41 countries (Table 6). Authors
affiliated with United States universities contributed to 60.3% of arti-
cles, followed by the United Kingdom (14.3%), Australia (9.8%), the
Netherlands (9.6%), Germany (7.5%) and Canada (6.7%; see Table 6
for others).

We grouped countries together by geographic region in order to
parsimoniously investigate the diversity of contributions and con-
tributors. Articles with authors from a single region dominated LQ in
the last decade (69.9%), yet a meaningful number (26.7%) came from

Table 5
Yearly review issues.

Year Volume Issue Title Theme Editor/citation

2010 21 6 A scholarly tribute to Bernard M. Bass and James G. Hunt No Yammarino, F. J. (2010)
2011 22 6 None No Schriesheim, C. A. (2011)
2012 23 6 Methodological advances in leadership Yes Schriesheim, C. A. (2012)
2013 24 6 Advances in traditional leadership theory (part I) Yes Schriesheim, C. A. (2013)
2014 25 6 Advances in traditional leadership theory (part II) Yes Schriesheim, C. A. (2014)
2015 26 6 Advances in leadership theory and research No Schriesheim, C. A. (2015)
2016a 27
2017 28 1 Multidisciplinary, multilevel, multisource, multiskilled and multigenerational perspectives No Dionne, S. D. (2017)
2018 29 1 Pushing the frontiers of leadership scholarship No Day, D. V. (2018)
2019 30 1 State-of-science reviews on leadership theory, methods, and measurement No Day, D. V. (2019)

a The Yearly Review issue was moved from Issue 6 of 2016 to Issue 1 of 2017; it is published in Issue 1 every year thereafter.

W.L. Gardner, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

10



two different geographic regions. Articles with authors representing
three and four world regions were rare (3.1%). Articles with affiliations
from Europe (36.7%) were the second most common after the United
States (60.3%), followed by Asia (14.0%), Australia and New Zealand
(11.2%), North America non-US (Mexico and Canada; 6.7%), Middle
East (3.4%), and Central/South America (0.8%). The percent of authors
and authorships by geographic region were similar (see Table 7). So,
while the United States was the largest contributor with respect to af-
filiations, approximately 50% of the authors and authorships came from
non-US sources. Further, while US-based University of Oklahoma and
Binghamton University (SUNY) topped the list, there were 14 non-US
institutions in the top 34 in terms of contributions to articles (41.2%;
Table 8), with Erasmus University Rotterdam placing third. These data

suggest that during the third decade, LQ has expanded its international
footprint to become a more global journal. Finally, corporate/con-
sulting affiliations account for 2% of the authorships. The Center for
Creative Leadership leads in terms of number of authors (5), number of
articles (11), and affiliations (16).

As noted during the prior discussion of the distribution of disciplines
represented among LQ's editorial leadership, one of the primary com-
ponents of LQ's mission since its inception has been to publish articles
from a wide array of disciplines. In their review of LQ's first decade,
Lowe and Gardner (2000) noted that the journal had modest success in
achieving this goal, as 67% of authors were affiliated with business
schools and/or management departments, with psychology a distant
second with 16%. Gardner et al. (2010) concluded that progress toward
this goal was achieved in LQ's second decade, as the proportion of au-
thors from non-management/business disciplines increased from 33%
to 38%. Our findings suggest that this trend was reversed in LQ's third
decade, as roughly two-thirds (69.3%) of authorships were again af-
filiated with management departments, and another 23.6% with psy-
chology departments, leaving only 7.2% from other fields (i.e., 30.7%
non-management). However, greater diversity of disciplines is apparent
for 2019 (Table 9), where the proportion of psychology-affiliated au-
thorships dropped to 18.6%, and the level of representation from the
fields of economics (6.4%), anthropology (2.1%), and other fields
(3.6%) increased. Thus, we echo Lowe and Gardner's initial conclusion
that only modest success with regard to this element of LQ's mission has
been achieved over the past three decades. Nonetheless, there is some
preliminary evidence that the strategic decision of the current editor,
John Antonakis, to recruit AEs with more diverse disciplinary back-
grounds is attracting scholars from disciplines that have not historically
been represented among contributing authors. It remains to be seen if
this trend will be sustained and perhaps accelerated over the next
decade.

Coder agreement

In an effort to ensure consistency in the coding of articles, the six-
member author team developed a coding manual. Each article was then
coded by one of the authors using the codebook as a point of reference.
In a further effort to promote coding consistency, the author team met
regularly throughout the coding process to discuss and address any
challenges/uncertainties regarding the coding scheme and its applica-
tion. Following the coding of the 615 articles, interrater reliability was
computed by having a different author independently code a subset of
20% of the articles. Interrater reliability was computed for the three
main coding categories of focal theory, article type, and study methods
and analyses. Note that the article type and focal theory were coded at
the article level, whereas the study methods and analysis were coded at
the study level, since some articles reported methods and results for
multiple studies. The percentage agreement for the focal theory, a
single coding item, was 93%. For article type, the percentage agreement
was 97% and the pairwise Cohen's kappa was 0.92 with a range of
0.88–0.97. For study methods, the percentage agreement was 98% and
Cohen's kappa was 0.89 with a range of 0.81–0.96. Each of these results
is indicative of a very high level of rater agreement and hence reliability
(Fleiss, 1981), with values of 0.81–1.0 characterized as near perfect
agreement (Landis & Koch, 1977). Following the computation of the
interrater reliability statistics, all discrepancies were discussed until a
consensus was reached.

Leadership theories

A summary of the focal theories reflected in studies published in LQ
during the last decade, as coded using the aforementioned Meuser et al.
(2016) taxonomy (https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/suppl/10.1177/
0149206316647099), is presented in Table 10. Two important points
about how we coded theories merit attention. First, by focal theory, we

Table 6
Contributions by country.

Country Rank Articles

United States 1 371 60.3%
United Kingdom 2 88 14.3%
Australia 3 60 9.8%
Netherlands 4 59 9.6%
Germany 5 46 7.5%
Canada 6 41 6.7%
China 7 34 5.5%
Switzerland 8 20 3.3%
Hong Kong 9 17 2.8%
Israel 10 15 2.4%
South Korea 11 14 2.3%
Singapore 11 14 2.3%
Norway 13 12 2.0%
Taiwan 14 10 1.6%
New Zealand 15 9 1.5%
Portugal 15 9 1.5%
Belgium 17 8 1.3%
Spain 18 5 0.8%
Sweden 18 5 0.8%
Denmark 20 4 0.7%
Malaysia 21 3 0.5%
France 21 3 0.5%
Macau 21 3 0.5%
Brazil 21 3 0.5%
Finland 25 2 0.3%
Turkey 25 2 0.3%
Italy 25 2 0.3%
Slovenia 25 2 0.3%
Austria 25 2 0.3%
Colombia 25 2 0.3%
Cyprus 31 1 0.2%
Egypt 31 1 0.2%
Greece 31 1 0.2%
Ireland 31 1 0.2%
Argentina 31 1 0.2%
Liechtenstein 31 1 0.2%
Pakistan 31 1 0.2%
Philippines 31 1 0.2%
Scotland 31 1 0.2%
United Arab Emirates 31 1 0.2%
Lebanon 31 1 0.2%

Table 7
Contributions by world region.

World region Articles Authors Authorships

Australia/New Zealand 69 11.2% 84 6.1% 121 6.1%
Asia 86 14.0% 120 8.7% 166 8.4%
Central/South America 5 0.8% 9 0.7% 9 0.5%
Europe 226 36.7% 407 29.6% 548 27.7%
Middle East 21 3.4% 25 1.8% 34 1.7%
North America non-US 41 6.7% 69 5.0% 85 4.3%
United States 371 60.3% 663 48.1% 1016 51.3%

W.L. Gardner, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

11

https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/suppl/10.1177/0149206316647099
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/suppl/10.1177/0149206316647099


mean the theory that is most prominent and provides the underlying
theoretical foundation for the research. Second, while we also coded
supporting theories that complemented the focal theory, for the sake of
parsimony, we limit our analysis and discussion to the focal theories.
Nonetheless, it is also important to recognize that many leadership
theories that were infrequently identified as focal theories nonetheless
appeared as supporting theories (e.g., attribution theories, transactional

leadership) that were used in concert with the focal theory to better
explicate the nuances and intricacies of dynamic leadership processes.2

Before we examine the focal theories published in LQ during its

Table 8
Contributions by institution.

Institution name Articles Rank by articles Affiliations Rank by affiliations

University of Oklahoma 37 1 77 1
Binghamton University (SUNY) 25 2 62 2
Erasmus University Rotterdam 20 3 40 3
Pennsylvania State University 19 4 34 4
Arizona State University 15 7 33 5
University of Queensland (UQ) 17 5 33 5
University of Groningen 16 6 32 7
George Mason University 9 18 24 8
University of Warwick 15 7 23 9
University of Washington 13 9 20 10
University of Houston 9 18 20 10
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam 11 12 19 12
National University of Singapore (NUS) 9 18 19 12
Durham University 13 9 19 12
University of North Carolina At Charlotte 8 26 19 12
University of Miami 9 18 18 16
University of Nebraska 11 12 18 16
Aston University 9 18 17 18
University of Lausanne 8 26 17 18
University of Illinois At Chicago (UIC) 10 15 17 18
University of Central Florida 17 18
Texas Tech University 16 22
Center For Creative Leadership 11 12 16 22
University of Amsterdam 9 18 16 22
Florida State University 8 26 16 22
Michigan State University 12 11 15 26
Xi'An Jiaotong University 15 26
Bi Norwegian Business School 9 18 14 28
California State University, Fullerton 14 28
University of Akron 9 18 14 28
Queen's University 13 31
Peking University 10 15 12 32
University of Toronto 12 32
Australian National University (ANU) 12 32
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München 12 32
Claremont Graduate University 10 15 11 36
University of Minnesota 11 36
University of Exeter 8 26 11 36
Bar-Ilan University 8 26 11 36
University of Melbourne 11 36
Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia Tech) 10 41
University of Alabama 10 41
University of St. Gallen (HSG) 10 41
United States Military Academy 10 41
Claremont Mckenna College 8 26 9 45
Monash University 9 45
Drexel University 9 45
Virginia Polytechnic Institute (Virginia Tech) 9 45
Renmin (People's) University of China 9 45
University of Western Australia (UWA) 8 26 9 45
State University of New York at Binghamton 9 45
Florida International University 8 52
Griffith University 8 52
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven 8 52
University of Haifa 8 52
University of California, Berkeley (UCB) 8 52
University of Notre Dame 8 26 8 52
University of Waterloo 8 52
University of New South Wales (UNSW) 8 52
University of Richmond 8 52

We applied a cutoff of eight for both articles and affiliations.

2 A summary of the coding results for secondary leadership theories is
available from the first author upon request.

W.L. Gardner, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

12



third decade, it is useful to elaborate on the findings from the prior two
decades provided in our introduction. Lowe and Gardner (2000) found
that neo-charismatic leadership theories, which included transforma-
tional leadership, were by far the most common focal theories (34%)
employed in LQ articles during the journal's first decade, followed by
contingency theories (12%), multiple level approaches (9%), and trait
theories (8%). However, a full quarter of the theories were classified as
Other Approaches and encompassed leadership and diversity, cross-
cultural leadership, and managerial work. Moreover, 14% of the arti-
cles were classified as New Directions. In LQ's second decade, the focal
leadership theories that Lowe and Gardner (2000) categorized as New
Directions exploded to encompass a full 44.4% of the articles, with
emerging theories such as ethical/servant/spiritual/authentic leader-
ship (5.4%), the development and identification of leaders and lea-
dership (5.5%), and contextual influences on leadership (5.6%) gaining
attention. While neo-charismatic (12.6%) approaches remained pop-
ular, the proportion of articles focused on these approaches declined, as
it did for more traditional leadership theories such as trait theories
(3.8%), behavioral theories (4.4%), and contingency theories (1.0%).
Slightly more attention was devoted to multiple level approaches (12%)
in LQ's second decade.

An examination of Table 10 reveals some interesting trends in terms
of the relative prominence of theories represented in LQ studies over
the past decade. At the outset, it is important to recognize that the focal
theory taxonomies used by Lowe and Gardner (2000) and Gardner et al.
(2010) included 28 and 29 theories, respectively. In contrast, the
Meuser et al. (2016) taxonomy we employed includes 49 focal theories;
hence, comparisons of the proportions of articles that adopted a given
focal theory are smaller, simply because there are more focal theories.
As such, our comparisons across decades focus on the relative propor-
tions of articles using a focal theory, as opposed to the percentage. To
facilitate such comparisons, we have sorted the focal theories from most
to least commonly used and grouped them into clusters in the table.

The first cluster reflects the most commonly-used focal theories and
includes nine that were invoked in more than 4% of the articles coded. As
in LQ's first decade, transformational leadership again emerged as the most
commonly researched theory, serving as the focal theory in 7.6% of the
articles. Note that in their 2010 review, Gardner and colleagues did not
distinguish between transformational and charismatic leadership, as both
were coded as neo-charismatic theories. Applying the more fine-grained
Meuser et al. (2016) taxonomy, however, it becomes apparent that

popularity of these theories has followed different trajectories, as charis-
matic leadership only served as the focal theory in 3.4% of the articles.
Thus, despite pointed criticisms (e.g., van Knippenberg & Sitkin, 2013),
transformational leadership theory remains popular. In contrast, despite
Antonakis, Bastardoz, Jacquart, and Shamir's (2016) efforts to strengthen
charismatic leadership theory and a special issue devoted to the topic
(Antonakis & Gardner, 2017), the proportion of articles focused on char-
isma has declined. Nonetheless, we speculate that the refined definition
and recommendations for enhancing the rigor of charismatic leadership
research advanced by Antonakis et al. (2016) may stimulate renewed in-
terest in the topic in the next decade.

Interestingly, the coding category of “none” tied with transformational
leadership as the most commonly selected category at 7.6%. This indicates
that many articles published in LQ's third decade lacked a focal theory.
Reasons why this category may have been applicable include: a) the in-
clusion of multiple but no dominant leadership theory (often the case for
review articles such as this one); b) a focus on methods rather than theory;
and c) a focal theory that reflects a new conceptual perspective that could
not be classified using the Meuser et al. (2016) taxonomy. The former case
is consistent with Meuser and colleagues' conclusion that many leadership
articles draw upon and integrate multiple leadership theories. In the latter
case, the “none” category essentially reflects the New Directions category
employed in the prior two reviews. Thus, even with a taxonomy of 49
leadership theories, new theories emerged over the last decade that defied
classification. This finding documents the theoretical vigor of the field,
while simultaneously raising concerns about unnecessary construct pro-
liferation (Banks, Gooty, Ross, Williams, & Harrington, 2018; Leavitt,
Mitchell, & Peterson, 2010).

The next most common focal theory was leadership development at
5.8%. The inclusion of a special issue devoted to leadership develop-
ment (Riggio & Mumford, 2011) early in the decade clearly contributed
to the relatively high proportion of articles with the publication of ar-
ticles in subsequent years demonstrating continued interest in the topic.
We consider this to be a very positive development as insufficient at-
tention has been devoted to this critical topic in the past. Leader-
member exchange (LMX) theory emerged as the third most common
focal theory (5.7%), and interest in this topic remained strong
throughout the decade. LQ's third decade also saw a resurgence in at-
tention to trait (dispositional) approaches, as this constituted the fourth
most common focal theory (5.0%). Perhaps this resurgence is, at least in
part, the result of work by Judge and colleagues (Judge & Bono, 2000;

Table 9
Author discipline.

Year Management Psychology Anthropology Economics Sociology Political science Engineering Medical Legal Philosophy Mathematics Physics Other

2010 125 43 0 1 0 1 2 3 0 0 0 0 19
64.4% 22.2% 0.0% 0.5% 0.0% 0.5% 1.0% 1.5% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 9.8%

2011 143 73 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 11
61.9% 31.6% 0.4% 0.4% 0.4% 0.4% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 4.8%

2012 181 57 1 2 0 1 1 3 0 0 0 0 6
71.8% 22.6% 0.4% 0.8% 0.0% 0.4% 0.4% 1.2% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 2.4%

2013 146 34 0 5 0 4 0 1 0 0 0 0 4
75.3% 17.5% 0.0% 2.6% 0.0% 2.1% 0.0% 0.5% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 2.1%

2014 173 64 0 1 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 0 7
69.8% 25.8% 0.0% 0.4% 0.0% 0.0% 0.4% 0.8% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 2.8%

2015 165 59 3 5 0 0 1 4 0 0 0 0 1
69.3% 24.8% 1.3% 2.1% 0.0% 0.0% 0.4% 1.7% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.4%

2016 124 27 0 2 1 7 1 1 0 0 0 0 5
73.8% 16.1% 0.0% 1.2% 0.6% 4.2% 0.6% 0.6% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 3.0%

2017 103 38 1 2 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 3
69.6% 25.7% 0.7% 1.4% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.7% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 2.0%

2018 117 47 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 1
68.4% 27.5% 0.0% 2.3% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 1.2% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.6%

2019 97 26 3 9 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 3
69.3% 18.6% 2.1% 6.4% 0.7% 0.0% 0.0% 0.7% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 2.1%

Totals 1374 468 9 32 3 14 6 18 0 0 0 0 60
69.3% 23.6% 0.5% 1.6% 0.2% 0.7% 0.3% 0.9% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 3.0%

W.L. Gardner, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

13



Judge, Colbert, & Ilies, 2004; Judge, Piccolo, & Kosalka, 2009) which
demonstrated that prior reviews were misinterpreted as dismissing the
utility of the trait approach (Mann, 1959; Stogdill, 1948). This dismissal
is now regarded as premature as traits were shown to have considerable
power in predicting leadership emergence and effectiveness. Prominent
theories that were previously coded by Lowe and Gardner (2000) and
Gardner et al. (2010) as Other Approaches or New Directions that
gained increased attention in LQ's third decade include leadership and
diversity (4.9%), emotions and leadership (4.7%), strategic leadership
(4.5%), and destructive leadership (4.1%), which includes abusive su-
pervision. It is noteworthy that Dinh et al. (2014) reported similar
findings with respect to the prominent and emerging theories they
identified in their review of the leadership literature published in top
management journals between 2000 and 2012.

The next set of focal leadership theories includes 18 that were found
in less than 4% but more than 1% of the articles coded. Note that ethical
(3.4%), authentic (3.1%), and servant (1.3%) leadership first emerged
as focal theories in the Gardner et al. (2010) review, where they were

grouped together with spiritual leadership to account for 5.4% of the
focal theories. As a set, it is clear that these theories garnered increased
attention over the past decade. Additionally, given that these theories
differ in their assumptions and posited processes, the separation of
these theories into distinct categories proved to be useful, both for
conceptual reasons and to better track their relative influence. The rise
of these theories is consistent with trends identified by Dinh et al.
(2014), which suggests that the field of leadership and LQ in particular
continues to be open to new and maturing perspectives, along with
empirical tests of theories that emerged during the prior two decades.
Additional focal theories that were labeled as Other Approaches and
New Directions in prior reviews that fall into this cluster include lea-
dership in teams (1.9%), contextual/complexity/adaptive approaches
(1.9%), power/influence/politics (1.8%), public leadership (1.8%), and
cross-cultural leadership (1.3%). Interest in these topics has remained
relatively steady over the past two decades. Finally, some focal theories
(e.g., followership theory; 1%) gained recognition as distinct theories
for the first time, while the influence of some theories that were once

Table 10
Focal leadership theories.

Theory 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Total % of Articles

Transformational Leadership 7 10 6 7 3 11 2 1 0 0 47 7.6%
NONE 5 3 10 3 7 3 0 4 8 4 47 7.6%
Leadership Development 8 10 1 1 6 2 0 4 2 2 36 5.8%
LMX 1 2 9 2 8 2 3 3 4 1 35 5.7%
Trait Theories 0 9 6 3 3 3 1 2 2 2 31 5.0%
Leadership & Diversity 2 1 2 0 0 2 12 2 4 5 30 4.9%
Emotions & Leadership 2 2 4 5 3 9 1 1 1 1 29 4.7%
Strategic Leadership 6 3 3 2 4 2 3 2 1 2 28 4.5%
Destructive Leadership 1 3 4 7 1 2 2 1 2 2 25 4.1%

Leader & Follower Cognitions 2 1 2 0 4 10 1 1 0 1 22 3.6%
Participative/Shared/Delegation/Empowerment 2 2 1 1 4 2 8 1 0 1 22 3.6%
Charismatic Leadership 2 2 2 2 0 0 3 7 1 2 21 3.4%
Ethical Leadership 0 4 2 5 1 3 1 1 4 0 21 3.4%
Authentic Leadership 2 2 4 3 2 0 2 1 2 1 19 3.1%
Implicit Leadership 1 2 1 1 6 1 0 3 1 1 17 2.8%
Contextual/Complexity/Adaptive 2 2 0 0 0 1 3 0 2 2 12 1.9%
Leadership in Teams 1 2 2 0 2 1 2 0 1 1 12 1.9%
Emergence 1 0 1 0 0 2 2 1 1 3 11 1.8%
Identity/Identification Process 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 3 2 0 11 1.8%
Power/Influence/Politics 2 2 1 2 0 2 0 2 0 0 11 1.8%
Public Leadership 8 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 11 1.8%
Info Processing/Decision Making 3 3 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 9 1.5%
Social Identity 0 1 0 1 3 1 1 0 2 0 9 1.5%
Behavioral Theories 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 2 2 8 1.3%
Cross-Cultural (GLOBE) 0 0 2 1 0 5 0 0 0 0 8 1.3%
Servant Leadership 0 0 0 2 1 1 2 0 1 1 8 1.3%
Followership Theory 1 0 1 2 1 0 0 0 0 1 6 1.0%

Ideological/Pragmatic Leadership 0 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 5 0.8%
Relational Leadership 0 0 4 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0.8%
Leadership Skills/Competence 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 4 0.6%
Social Network Approaches 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 4 0.6%
Reward and Punishment Behavior 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 3 0.5%
Entrepreneurial Leadership 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0.3%
Romance of Leadership 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 0.3%
Spiritual Leadership 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 0.3%
Contingency Theories 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0.2%
E-Leadership 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0.2%
Leader Motive Profile 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0.2%
Pygmalion Effect 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0.2%
Transactional Leadership 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0.2%

Aesthetic Leadership 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0%
Attribution Theories 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0%
Flexibility 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0%
Idiosyncratic 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0%
Leadership Substitute 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0%
Multiple Linkage Model 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0%
Path-Goal Theory 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0%
Self-Sacrificing Leadership 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0%
Situational Leadership 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0%

W.L. Gardner, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

14



dominant (e.g., behavioral approaches; 1.3%) has waned.
The third cluster of theories includes 13 that were found in fewer

than 1% but more than 0% of the studies coded. This cluster includes a
mixture of theories from relatively young areas of inquiry (e.g., ideo-
logical/pragmatic [0.8%], relational [0.8%], social network [0.6%],
entrepreneurial [0.3%], spiritual [0.3%], and E-leadership [0.2%]), as
well as others that are more mature (e.g., leadership skills/competence
[0.6%], reward and punishment behavior [0.5%], romance of leader-
ship [0.3%], transactional [0.2%], leader motive profile [0.2%],
Pygmalion effect [0.2%], and contingency [0.2%] approaches).

The final cluster of theories identifies nine theories that are included
in our taxonomy but were not indicated as the focal theory in any ar-
ticle published in LQ in the most recent decade. These include a mixture
of mature theories (e.g., leadership substitute theory, multiple linkage
theory, path-goal theory, attribution theories, situational leadership
theory, idiosyncratic leadership theory), and several that are relatively
narrow in focus (e.g., aesthetic leadership, self-sacrificing, flexibility
leadership theory). While a resurgence of interest in some of the mature
approaches is certainly possible, as has been the case for the trait ap-
proach, we think it is more likely that the decades-long decline in at-
tention to these approaches (Dinh et al., 2014; Gardner et al., 2010;
Lowe & Gardner, 2000; Zhao & Li, 2019) will continue, while the trends
for the ascending approaches (e.g., authentic, ethical, servant, and
strategic leadership; Dinh et al., 2014; Zhao & Li, 2019) will be sus-
tained. Perhaps some of the more narrowly-focused theories are can-
didates for integration with more general leadership theories, such as
contextual/complexity/adaptive approaches to leadership.

Quantitative techniques and designs

A summary of the types of research designs used in quantitative
studies is presented in Table 11. As with prior decade reviews, we found
that field surveys are still favored when collecting primary data with
46.8% of studies in the present decade employing this technique. One
potential concern is the use of convenience samples (e.g., students, online
panels, or samples from authors' own social media connections), which
accounted for the sample in 54.0% of the 598 quantitative studies, the
vast majority of which involved surveys. Laboratory experiments showed
a marked increase in usage, ranking second (26.4%) overall; only 5% of
quantitative studies used experimental designs in the prior decade.
Consistent with prior decade reviews, we find experience sampling, field
experiments, quasi-experiments, field surveys with secondary data, and
computer simulations to be employed infrequently. Clearly, given the
strengths of some of these designs, such as quasi-experimental research
(Grant & Wall, 2009), opportunities remain to better capitalize on a wider
range of research designs to generate novel and more rigorous findings.

Quantitative analytical techniques

A summary of the analytical/statistical techniques employed in
quantitative studies is provided in Table 12. The most common statis-
tical analyses performed in quantitative studies were: 1) linear regres-
sion (43.0%); 2) analysis of variance, including both ANOVA, ANCOVA,
and MANOVA/MANCOVA (32.6%); 3) structural equation modeling
(SEM) and path analysis (16.6%); and 4) multi-level analytical techni-
ques (e.g., hierarchical linear modeling [HLM], and multi-level SEM;
19.2%). Given the inherently multi-level nature of leadership phe-
nomena (e.g., leaders and members within dyads and groups; leaders,
members and groups within organizations), it is somewhat surprising
that multi-level analytical techniques were not used more often.
Nonetheless, they were used more often than was the case in the prior
decade (8%), so there is evidence of increasing efforts to evaluate multi-
level leadership relationships. Another favorable trend involves the
increased use of non-parametric techniques (8.4%) over the prior
decade (2%), as such methods have notable advantages over traditional
null hypothesis testing (Kruschke, Aguinis, & Joo, 2012).Ta

bl
e
11

R
es

ea
rc

h
de

si
gn

s.

Y
ea

r
V

ol
C

om
pu

te
r

si
m

bo
ot

st
ra

p

C
on

te
nt

an
al

ys
is

D
ia

ry
st

ud
y

ES
M

La
b

ex
pe

ri
m

en
t

no
t

ex
p

si
m

Fi
el

d
su

rv
ey

(p
ri

m
ar

y
da

ta
)

Fi
el

d
su

rv
ey

(s
ec

on
da

ry
da

ta
)

Fi
el

d
ex

pe
ri

m
en

t
Ex

pe
ri

m
en

ta
l

si
m

ul
at

io
n

Q
ua

si
-

ex
pe

ri
m

en
t

Ju
dg

m
en

t
ta

sk
M

et
a-

an
al

ys
is

(q
ua

nt
re

vi
ew

)

R
ev

ie
w

(n
on

m
et

a)

C
on

ve
ni

en
ce

sa
m

pl
e

In
te

rv
ie

w
O

bs
er

va
ti

on
A

rc
hi

va
l

da
ta

20
10

21
2

6
0

13
32

3
4

1
2

6
0

4
28

9
1

14
20

11
22

5
9

2
15

40
5

1
1

0
16

1
17

55
8

3
18

20
12

23
0

3
0

14
47

4
0

1
2

2
1

10
34

3
2

7
20

13
24

0
2

0
24

29
0

1
0

0
2

2
7

39
3

2
12

20
14

25
3

4
0

24
35

1
0

5
2

10
2

8
49

5
1

13
20

15
26

2
2

1
22

32
2

1
0

2
2

2
4

39
7

1
13

20
16

27
3

3
0

11
24

0
5

0
1

6
2

3
19

4
0

11
20

17
28

0
0

0
7

9
2

3
1

0
0

5
10

16
1

0
4

20
18

29
0

0
1

19
22

0
0

3
1

10
4

14
29

1
2

3
20

19
30

3
4

0
9

10
3

0
2

1
5

2
11

15
1

0
10

To
ta

l
18

33
4

15
8

28
0

20
15

14
11

59
21

88
32

3
42

12
10

5
To

ta
l

%
3.

0%
5.

5%
0.

7%
26

.4
%

46
.8

%
3.

3%
2.

5%
2.

3%
1.

8%
9.

9%
3.

5%
14

.7
%

54
.0

%
7.

0%
2.

0%
17

.6
%

W.L. Gardner, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

15



Table 12
Quantitative techniques.

Year Vol Analysis of
variance
(ANOVA/
MANOVA)

Computer sim Techniques for
categorical DVs (can
include MSEM)

Linear regression
(single outcome var;
not path analysis)

Multiple levels
of analysis
(HLM, MSEM)

Meta-
analysis

Non-parametric
techniques

SEM &
path
analysis

Time series/
event history
(LGM)

2SLS (Social)
network
analysis

Curvilinear
analyses

Domin./
relative
weight

PLS

2010 21 23 3 2 19 11 0 0 8 2 0 1 0 0 0
2011 22 22 0 2 22 12 1 3 7 3 0 0 7 0 2
2012 23 18 0 4 33 16 1 7 17 0 1 0 0 4 1
2013 24 22 0 7 23 11 2 12 16 0 1 0 0 2 0
2014 25 32 1 6 37 13 2 19 11 1 2 1 4 1 0
2015 26 27 2 9 32 17 2 4 12 1 1 0 1 0 0
2016 27 12 4 3 25 12 2 2 8 1 1 3 3 0 0
2017 28 15 0 0 20 9 5 0 8 2 1 2 3 1 0
2018 29 19 0 10 24 10 4 1 8 0 6 1 2 0 0
2019 30 5 3 5 22 4 2 2 4 4 12 1 6 0 0
Total 195 13 48 257 115 21 50 99 14 25 9 26 8 3
Total % 32.6% 2.2% 8.0% 43.0% 19.2% 3.5% 8.4% 16.6% 2.3% 4.2% 1.5% 4.3% 1.3% 0.5%

Table 13
Sample type.

Year Vol Private
(company)

Public (govt/
municipal/edu)

Military Health care NGO UG students
(non-working)

Grad/MBA
students (non-
working)

UG students
(working)

Grad/MBA
students
(working)

Purpose
theoretical

Snowball Mturk Qualtrics
panel

Other online
3rd party
source

Sample not
reported

2010 21 14 15 4 4 5 15 1 4 5 3 4 0 0 0 0
2011 22 37 25 5 7 8 18 3 0 7 14 4 0 0 7 1
2012 23 27 15 2 9 2 15 1 2 4 1 2 0 0 3 0
2013 24 16 10 3 1 0 18 1 5 1 0 3 0 0 5 0
2014 25 22 8 0 3 0 18 3 5 3 1 1 6 0 5 4
2015 26 29 4 3 4 0 12 4 5 7 1 2 6 1 3 0
2016 27 19 6 2 2 0 11 3 0 1 0 2 3 0 1 0
2017 28 15 5 0 2 0 1 2 1 2 1 2 5 0 3 1
2018 29 12 4 1 2 0 11 1 2 2 4 1 11 1 2 0
2019 30 11 5 0 1 0 6 0 3 2 3 1 4 0 2 2
Total 202 97 20 35 15 125 19 27 34 28 22 35 2 31 8
Total % 31.1% 14.9% 3.1% 5.4% 2.3% 19.3% 2.9% 4.2% 5.2% 4.3% 3.4% 5.4% 0.3% 4.8% 1.2%

W
.L.

G
ardner,

et
al.

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101379

16



Table 14
Sample information.

Year Vol Sample sizes Source of data

Sample
size (L1)

Sample
size (L2)

Meta-
analysis N

Meta-
analysis k

Self/focal Peer of
focal

Follower of
focal

Leader/mgr/
supervisor/direct
report of focal

Family of
focal

Customer of
focal

Team of
focal

Organization of
focal

Rater
provided

Archive
(company
data)

3rd party
(archive)

Other
data
source

2010 21 27,952 1068 0 0 27 3 5 11 0 0 0 12 11 3 8 3
68
2011 22 46,423 2083 5113 31 44 4 11 52 1 0 6 13 10 9 2 7
79
2012 23 31,124 2409 3245 11 59 5 15 38 2 0 6 2 17 3 3 14
80
2013 24 21,432 2587 3763 14 56 4 7 36 1 0 3 5 5 3 8 2
61
2014 25 46,228 4584 3882 54 57 5 10 23 0 1 3 6 19 5 9 1
68
2015 26 59,546 7748 17,920 97 53 4 11 40 0 0 6 7 9 5 6 10
70
2016 27 19,816 3271 43,591 140 25 8 6 23 1 0 5 5 10 11 1 6
55
2017 28 12,387 2550 234,694 758 24 4 3 19 0 0 4 2 3 2 3 0
45
2018 29 12,087 3018 34,308 294 27 2 9 16 0 0 3 4 15 2 4 1
48
2019 30 69,819 3147 74,049 238 13 4 6 5 0 0 2 9 7 3 1 7
41
Total 346,814 32,465 420,565 1637 385 43 83 263 5 1 38 65 106 46 45 51
Total % 59.3% 6.6% 12.8% 40.5% 0.8% 0.2% 5.9% 10.0% 16.3% 7.1% 6.9% 7.9%

W
.L.

G
ardner,

et
al.

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101379

17



Sam
ple

size
and

source
of
data

D
uring

LQ
's

third
decade,researchers

have
prim

arily
relied

on
data

from
com

panies
(31.1%

of
em

pirical
studies),

non-w
orking

under-
graduate

students
(19.3%

),
and

public
entities,

such
as

governm
ent,

m
unicipalities,or

education
institutions

(14.9%
;see

Table
13).Prim

ary
em

pirical
leadership

research
published

in
LQ

from
2010

to
2019

in-
corporates

data
(Table

14)
from

346,814
respondents

(at
level

1
if

m
ulti-level)

and
32,465

supervisors
(in

m
ulti-level

studies).
The

21
exam

ples
of

m
eta-analytic

research
published

in
LQ

from
2010

to
2019

T
able

15
D

ata
source

location.

C
ountry

/
R

egion
2010

2011
2012

2013
2014

2015
2016

2017
2018

2019
Total

Total
%

A
ustralia

0
5

1
1

1
3

4
1

2
1

19
2.9%

A
ustria

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
1

1
0.2%

B
elgium

0
0

0
1

5
1

0
0

1
0

8
1.2%

B
razil

0
0

1
0

0
0

0
0

1
0

2
0.3%

B
ritish

0
0

0
0

1
2

3
0

0
0

6
0.9%

C
anada

3
1

2
0

4
1

1
0

2
0

14
2.2%

C
hina

2
6

2
5

6
10

3
3

0
2

39
6.0%

C
yprus

0
0

2
0

0
0

0
1

0
0

3
0.5%

D
enm

ark
0

1
1

0
0

0
1

1
0

0
4

0.6%
Egypt

0
1

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

1
0.2%

England
0

0
1

2
1

0
2

0
0

0
6

0.9%
Finland

0
0

0
2

0
0

1
0

0
0

3
0.5%

G
erm

any
1

6
2

8
1

6
2

1
2

3
32

4.9%
G

reece
0

0
0

0
2

0
0

0
0

0
2

0.3%
H

ong
K

ong
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
1

0
1

0.2%
India

0
0

1
0

1
1

0
0

2
0

5
0.8%

Israel
1

2
3

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
6

0.9%
Jordan

0
0

0
0

1
0

0
0

0
0

1
0.2%

Lebanon
1

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
1

0.2%
M

acau
0

0
1

0
0

1
0

0
0

0
2

0.3%
N

etherlands
6

6
9

5
4

7
0

2
1

3
43

6.6%
N

ew
Zealand

0
0

0
0

0
1

0
0

0
0

1
0.2%

N
orw

ay
0

0
1

3
5

0
2

1
0

0
12

1.8%
Pakistan

0
0

0
0

0
0

1
0

0
0

1
0.2%

Philippines
0

0
2

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
2

0.3%
Portugal

0
1

1
1

0
1

0
1

0
0

5
0.8%

R
om

ania
0

0
0

0
0

1
0

0
0

0
1

0.2%
Singapore

0
0

0
0

0
1

0
0

0
0

1
0.2%

South
K

orea
1

1
0

1
0

0
1

0
2

0
6

0.9%
Sw

eden
1

0
2

0
0

0
0

0
0

1
4

0.6%
Sw

itzerland
0

0
0

0
2

3
0

0
1

0
6

0.9%
Taiw

an
0

0
0

1
0

0
1

1
1

0
4

0.6%
U

nited
K

ingdom
4

1
0

1
0

1
0

4
3

4
18

2.8%
U

nited
States

38
39

29
24

27
15

25
7

13
10

227
35.0%

M
ulti-national

1
6

2
3

8
11

5
3

3
5

47
7.2%

N
ot

reported
1

1
8

12
12

13
3

2
14

5
71

10.9%
U

nited
States

38
39

29
24

27
15

25
7

13
10

227
35.0%

Europe
12

15
16

21
21

20
6

10
8

12
141

21.7%
A

ustralia/N
ew

Zealand
0

5
1

1
1

4
4

1
2

1
20

3.1%
A

sia
3

7
6

7
7

13
6

4
6

2
61

9.4%
N

orth
A

m
erica

non-U
S

3
1

2
0

4
1

1
0

2
0

14
2.2%

M
iddle

East
2

3
5

0
1

0
0

1
0

0
12

1.8%
C

entral/South
A

m
erica

0
0

1
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

1
0.2%

M
ulti-national

1
6

2
3

8
11

5
3

3
5

47
7.2%

N
ot

reported
1

1
8

12
12

13
3

2
14

5
71

10.9%

T
able

16
M

easure
inform

ation.

Y
ear

V
ol

M
easure

type
Tim

ing

Existing
m

easure(s)
M

odifi
ed

existing
m

easure(s)
C

reated
m

easure(s)
Scale

developm
ent

paper
U

sed
diff

erent
scores

U
nobtrusive

B
iom

etric
C

ross
sectional

C
ross

sectional
tim

e
lag

Longitudinal

2010
21

42
26

29
1

0
0

1
41

12
6

2011
22

57
17

35
18

0
0

3
41

15
15

2012
23

62
31

19
0

1
0

4
58

13
3

2013
24

57
25

17
7

3
2

6
53

15
2

2014
25

61
21

30
11

0
0

7
80

5
2

2015
26

59
26

19
4

0
1

3
54

20
7

2016
27

39
20

18
0

0
0

6
30

24
2

2017
28

24
7

2
1

0
0

0
22

6
4

2018
29

29
14

20
4

2
4

1
34

8
1

2019
30

28
9

18
0

0
0

2
22

5
7

Total
458

196
207

46
6

7
33

435
123

49
Total

%
70.6%

30.2%
31.9%

7.1%
0.9%

1.1%
5.1%

67.0%
19.0%

7.6%

W
.L.

G
ardner,

et
al.

The Leadership Q
uarterly 31 (2020) 101379

18



T
ab
le

17
R

el
ia

bi
lit

y
in

fo
rm

at
io

n.

Y
ea

r
V

ol
R

el
ia

bi
lit

y
te

ch
ni

qu
e

C
ro

nb
ac

h
al

ph
a

C
FA

EF
A

C
on

ve
rg

en
t

va
lid

it
y

D
is

cr
im

in
an

t
va

lid
it

y
Pr

ed
ic

ti
ve

/
cr

it
er

io
n

va
lid

it
y

In
te

rr
at

er
re

lia
bi

lit
y

(I
R

R
)

IC
C

(1
)

IC
C

(2
)

W
A

B
A

20
10

21
41

11
7

2
6

0
22

5
9

3
20

11
22

56
26

17
10

17
6

17
15

11
3

20
12

23
67

23
12

3
6

3
5

21
14

1
20

13
24

53
24

2
6

17
3

4
20

13
1

20
14

25
54

31
11

17
20

4
9

15
14

2
20

15
26

66
26

4
18

15
1

4
18

14
1

20
16

27
34

20
4

4
8

0
10

17
11

0
20

17
28

23
11

1
3

1
1

8
9

5
2

20
18

29
23

15
4

4
3

0
4

11
7

1
20

19
30

19
3

0
0

2
3

2
2

5
0

To
ta

l
43

6
19

0
62

67
95

21
85

13
3

10
3

14
To

ta
l

%
67

.2
%

29
.3

%
9.

6%
10

.3
%

14
.6

%
3.

2%
13

.1
%

20
.5

%
15

.9
%

2.
2%

Y
ea

r
R

el
ia

bi
lit

y
te

ch
ni

qu
e

A
pp

ro
pr

ia
te

us
e

of
re

lia
bi

lit
y

R
w

g
Te

st
/r

et
es

t
Sp

lit
ha

lf
C

oh
en

ka
pp

a
Fa

ce
va

lid
it

y
(o

nl
y

if
au

th
or

s
di

sc
us

s)

C
on

se
ns

us
co

di
ng

O
th

er
va

lid
at

io
n

A
ll

ap
pl

ic
ab

le
va

ri
ab

le
s

So
m

e
ap

pl
ic

ab
le

va
ri

ab
le

s
N

o
ap

pl
ic

ab
le

va
ri

ab
le

s
N

ot
ap

pl
ic

ab
le

fo
r

so
m

e
va

ri
ab

le
s

20
10

5
1

0
1

0
0

0
42

5
12

2
20

11
9

1
2

2
0

2
0

51
10

3
0

20
12

11
2

2
1

2
1

0
67

1
2

26
20

13
11

1
1

3
1

2
0

57
0

11
20

20
14

11
1

1
0

1
1

0
63

1
15

24
20

15
11

1
1

4
0

3
0

63
5

11
23

20
16

13
0

1
4

1
2

0
35

3
18

14
20

17
6

0
0

2
1

0
0

19
2

4
3

20
18

5
0

0
2

0
4

0
32

4
8

2
20

19
2

0
2

2
0

2
0

21
0

15
1

To
ta

l
84

7
10

21
6

17
0

45
0

31
99

11
5

To
ta

l
%

12
.9

%
1.

1%
1.

5%
3.

2%
0.

9%
2.

6%
0.

0%
69

.3
%

4.
8%

15
.3

%
17

.7
%

W.L. Gardner, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

19



incorporated data from 420,565 participants and 1637 studies. Studies
employing self-report data (e.g., personality measures) accounted for
59.3% of studies, while 40.5% captured data about supervisors from
followers and 12.8% capture data from leaders about followers. What
our sample data do not reveal is the proportion of studies that collected
data from dyads (e.g., both the leader and the follower rate the quality
of their relationship; (Gooty & Yammarino, 2011). However, given the
relatively small proportion of data collected by one half of the potential
dyad–leaders–we suspect that such cases of matching data where both
parties rate the same variable (e.g., LMX quality) continue to be rela-
tively rare, as found in prior reviews (Gooty, Serban, Thomas, Gavin, &
Yammarino, 2012). This supports concerns that leadership research is
not adequately capturing the dyadic and reciprocal nature of the re-
lationship. Likewise, researchers may not be adequately addressing the
context within which leadership occurs, as team (5.9%) and organiza-
tion (10.0%) data constitutes a small fraction of the data published in
LQ between 2010 and 2019. Nearly absent are reports from peers, fa-
milies, and customers/outside sources, representing an opportunity for
expanding both theory and research designs. To further consider the
concern that researchers may not be adequately addressing the context
of leadership, we coded for the country from which study samples were
drawn (Table 15). Most data were sampled from the United States
(35.0% of studies) followed by Europe (21.7%) with the Netherlands
(6.6%) being the largest contributor, and Asia (9.4%), with China
(6.0%) being the largest contributor. Some data were truly multi-na-
tional (7.2%). Sample location was not reported in 10.9% of the em-
pirical articles.

Measure information

We also examined measures employed in LQ empirical studies
(Table 16). An examination of this table reveals that 70.6% studies that
collected data using survey measures employed existing measures,
while 30.2% used modified measures, and 31.9% created new mea-
sures. One point of concern we encountered involves these newly-cre-
ated measures, where only 46 of the 207 studies (22.2%) employed
standard scale development practices (e.g., DeVellis, 2017; Hinkin,
1998). This suggests a gap between best and actual practices in lea-
dership research. We also noted reliability information was missing in
some studies (20.0%; Table 17). Researchers publishing in LQ rarely
employed unobtrusive (1.1%) and biometric measures (5.1%), con-
tinuing a trend found in the earlier LQ reviews. Thus, there remains an
opportunity for novel research designs to explore leadership phe-
nomena. We encountered few instances of the use of difference scores,
which are generally seen as poor practice (Edwards, 2001). Regarding
the timing of data collection, cross-sectional designs remain a staple of
recent research (67.0%). Cross-sectional data collection with a time lag
between independent and outcome variables ranks second (19.0%);
true longitudinal research characterized by repeated measurement to
assess change is still relatively rare (7.6%).

Qualitative techniques

Few studies during LQ's third decade employed qualitative techni-
ques (52 studies, 8.7% of empirical studies; Table 18). Qualitative
studies were most common in 2010 (25.0%), followed by 2011
(23.1%), and 2014 and 2015 (13.5%), with the other years accounting
for less than 10% of the qualitative studies individually and 28.8%
together. Case studies were the most common form of qualitative en-
quiry (44.2% of qualitative studies), followed by grounded theory
(23.1%), narrative (21.2%), phenomenological (11.5%), and ethno-
graphic (3.8%) approaches. Given the complexity of the leadership
phenomenon, the dearth of studies that employ these context-rich ap-
proaches represents an opportunity for future research. With quanti-
tative inquiry alone, there is a risk of ignoring elements that are re-
quired for explaining relationships, as qualitative approaches can
enhance understanding of the context of leadership relationships as
well as the nature of the relationships themselves, thus generating more
meaningful explanations (Sofaer, 1999).

Strengths and limitations

One limitation of our design is the subjective (and error prone)
nature of human coding. This limitation is mitigated somewhat by a
strength of our design where we entered objective data into a database
form, which reduces errors versus entering data into a MS Excel file.
The very high degree of interrater agreement also suggests that the use
of a coding manual and the evolution (expansion) of the coding manual
as we learned from the coding process further reduced the chance of
error. Indeed, a strength over prior decade reviews is the use of an
expanded coding scheme, though this introduces the weakness of
making direct comparisons between decade reviews more difficult. We
believe that as the field evolves, the coding scheme used to describe the
field must also expand. When entering author gender, we made our
decision based on the first name of the author with further exploration
using internet images. It is possible that ProQuest has errors in this
field, our internet search was faulty, or that we intuited wrongly for
some authors. We drew our citation information from SCOPUS on
December 18, 2019. It is possible that SCOPUS has errors. This also
does not account for the full citation record of 2019, which was not
possible due to publication deadlines. Our author team includes early,
mid, and later stage scholars allowing for the strength of a variety of
viewpoints. One caveat to the reader: this review is by design and intent
restricted to LQ's third decade only. As such, trends in the study of
leadership that are not represented or proportionally represented in LQ
publications between 2010 and 2019 are not captured in the present
review.

Future directions

In their review of LQ's first decade of publications, Lowe and

Table 18
Qualitative analysis.

Year Volume Narrative Phenomenological Grounded theory Ethnographic Case study

2010 21 3 1 1 0 8
2011 22 1 1 2 2 6
2012 23 1 0 0 0 1
2013 24 0 0 0 0 1
2014 25 2 1 3 0 1
2015 26 0 0 2 0 5
2016 27 3 0 1 0 0
2017 28 1 1 2 0 0
2018 29 0 2 1 0 0
2019 30 0 0 0 0 1
Total 11 6 12 2 23
Total % 21.2% 11.5% 23.1% 3.8% 44.2%

W.L. Gardner, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

20



Gardner (2000) clearly delineated eight content directions for future
research. These were derived from their content analysis of LQ pub-
lications, interviews with the founding editors, and personal insights. In
their review of LQ's second decade of publications, Gardner et al.
(2010) briefly revisited these recommended content directions to see
how much progress had been made in pursuing them. After doing so,
however, they noted the difficulty of preparing a similar set of content-
oriented directions for future leadership research, given the “explosion
of leadership theories and novelty of approaches to studying leadership
that have emerged in the most recent decade” and hence “handicapping
a short list of future topics is more speculative than at any time in recent
decades” (p. 951). Instead, Gardner et al. (2010, p. 951) chose to
“identify a few study design and methodological aspects that will move
the science of the field forward in whatever content domains are re-
vealed to be most in favor over the next decade.”

For our review of LQ's third decade, it is informative to revisit the
content and methodological recommendations offered in past LQ re-
views as a prelude for our discussion of future research directions.
Toward that end, we provide a summary of Lowe and Gardner's (2000)
recommended content directions in Table 19, along with Gardner
et al.'s (2010) assessment of the extent that they were realized in LQ's
second decade, and our own assessment of the degree to which they
were addressed in LQ's third decade. In addition, we provide a summary
of Gardner et al.'s (2010) methodological recommendations in
Table 20, and include our evaluation of the extent to which these re-
commendations have been adopted in LQ's third decade. Because we
found that the content and methodological recommendations offered in
the prior reviews remain timely, we base our suggestions for future
research on the progress that has been made regarding their suggestions
while identifying opportunities for further advancements.

Table 19
LQ10 review recommendations revisited in LQ20 and LQ30 reviews.

LQ10 future directions identified LQ10 future directions revisited in
LQ20

LQ10 future directions revisited in LQ30

Strategic leadership Received considerable attention Receiving some attention, but more work is needed. Heightened awareness of importance of
strategic leadership is apparent from a forthcoming special issue on the topic (Bonardi et al.,
2018), as well as the inclusion of AEs with strategy disciplinary backgrounds.

Levels of analysis Received the most attention Level of awareness and attention to levels of analysis issues continues to increase.
Leadership development & leadership

systems
Received little attention Attention to leadership development has increased, as apparent from the publication of two

special issues (Hannum & Craig, 2010; Riggio & Mumford, 2011), another forthcoming (Day
et al., 2018), and appearance of the topic within the most cited articles.

Leadership context Received considerable attention (in
second half of decade)

Continues to receive moderate levels of attention.

Females as leaders Received little attention Increased attention to gender is apparent from the special issue on gender and diversity (Eagly
& Heilman, 2016). In addition, our coding of articles that focus on “leadership & diversity.”
Indeed, even though conceptually this theoretical category includes ethnicity, race, etc., we
observed while coding that the vast majority of articles coded focused exclusively on gender.

International leadership Received little attention Still receiving little attention, despite LQ's AEs, Editorial Review Board, and authors becoming
more international and culturally diverse. This is still an opportunity for future research.

Technology (impact on leadership) Received little attention Although our coding scheme did not include a category for technology and leadership per se, a
search of technology as a keyword identified few articles. This remains an opportunity for
future research.

Transformational/charismatic
leadership

Received the most attention Still receiving considerable attention as one of the most common focal leadership theories,
and also among the most cited articles.

Table 20
LQ20 review recommendations revisited.

LQ20 future directions identified LQ20 future directions revisited in LQ30

Expand set of measures The number of measures employed has definitely expanded with the introduction of several new leadership scales. But, has
the expansion come at the cost of rigor? Many articles modified scales and new measures failed to employ standard scale
development and validation processes.

Studies within studies (e.g., Study 1, Study 2, Study
3)

We have seen an increase in studies within studies, particularly in the most recent full year of LQ articles, 2018, with an
average of 1.35 studies per article, as opposed to a range from 0.78 to 1.24 in prior years. The extent to which this trend
extends into future years merits attention.

Interdisciplinary teams Though the second decade of LQ made progress toward a greater diversity of author disciplines, the third decade saw a
reversion with over two thirds of contributing authors being affiliated with management departments and over 90% being
affiliated with management or psychology departments. However, perhaps due to the recent increased diversity among the
AE team and editorial review board, there is preliminary evidence in the final years of the decade that support an increased
representation of authors from other fields. This trend and whether it is sustained should continue to be monitored over the
next decade.

Multi-level phenomena The adoption of multi-level techniques and examinations continued to increase in LQ's third decade. Nonetheless, greater
recognition of the multi-level nature of leadership phenomena is warranted, highlighting a need for more multi-level
studies.

Controlled experiments Empirical studies in LQ's third decade included 20% that employed lab experiments, as compared to only 5% in the
previous decade. This suggests that authors are responding to calls for more experimental designs, and particularly realistic
experiments ((Antonakis, 2017, a, 2017, b)).

Alternative methodologies Not enough has been done here. Over half of the LQ studies of the last decade employed one of two designs: field surveys
and lab experiments. There is definitely room for a greater variety of research designs (e.g., quasi-experiments).

Test competing models While we did not explicitly code the extent to which LQ studies tested competing models, our impression from coding is
that such tests were infrequent.

Cognition studies Greater attention is apparent from the special issue on leader cognition and neuroscience (Lee et al., 2012), as well as an
increase in the occurrence of leader and follower cognitions as a focal leadership theory.

Technology (for studying leadership) Not enough work has been done to expand the use of technology to study leadership. Relatively few studies employed
unobtrusive/biometric measures. This represents an area of opportunity as evolving technology provides ever expanding
methods for studying leadership.

W.L. Gardner, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

21



Revisiting Lowe and Gardner's (2000) content direction recommendations

Lowe and Gardner's (2000) recommended content directions for
future leadership research called for increased attention to the topics of
strategic leadership, levels of analysis, leadership development and
leadership systems, leadership context, women as leaders, international
leadership, technology (impact on leadership), and transformational/
charismatic leadership (see Table 19). Gardner et al. (2010) concluded
that the most attention was devoted to exploring levels-of-analysis is-
sues and transformational/charismatic leadership. While our third
decade review likewise revealed greater recognition and focus on
studying leadership as a multi-level phenomenon as evidenced by the
increased use of multi-level analytical techniques, we believe that
heightened consideration of this fundamental quality of leadership
(e.g., individuals, nested in teams, nested in organizations, nested in
industries, nested in nations) is still needed. As for theory and research
into transformational and charismatic leadership, the former continues
to garner high levels of attention, though not as much as in prior dec-
ades on a proportional basis, while the latter has experienced a more
precipitous decline in attention. Given recent critiques and reorienta-
tions of research into transformational (van Knippenberg & Sitkin,
2013) and charismatic (Antonakis et al., 2016) leadership, as well as an
LQ special issue (Antonakis & Gardner, 2017) focused on novel and
rigorous approaches toward studying the latter topic, we are optimistic
that research into these forms of leadership will continue, but in a more
productive and theoretically grounded manner that yields more
meaningful findings and implications for leadership practice. We also
note that alternative forms of inquiry such as qualitative methods might
prove useful in enhancing understanding about the context of charis-
matic leadership events as well as meaningful explanations about the
events themselves.

With regards to strategic leadership, Gardner et al. (2010) noted
that this topic gained considerable interest during LQ's second decade,
as apparent from special issues on strategic leadership that appeared
both within and outside LQ (e.g., Academy of Management Journal,
Strategic Management Journal). LQ's third decade saw a further increase
in attention to strategic leadership, as it was the eighth most common
focal theory, and a special issue was devoted to the topic (Bonardi, Hitt,
Vera, & Withers, 2018). Nevertheless, given the importance of strategic
leadership to key organizational outcomes including financial perfor-
mance, innovation, corporate social responsibility, and sustainability
(de Kluyver & Pearce, 2015; Yukl & Gardner, 2020), we strongly re-
commend that even more theoretical and empirical attention should be
devoted to this topic.

Gardner et al. (2010) also observed an uptick in attention to con-
textual influences on leadership (5.6%) and the related topic of com-
plexity perspectives of leadership (1.9%), particularly in the latter half
of LQ's second decade. However, we observed only modest interest in
contextual/complexity/adaptive leadership perspectives, as these
served as the focal theory in only 1.9% of the articles published in LQ's
third decade. We recommend that increased attention be devoted to
studying the influence of context on leadership (Osborn, Uhl-Bien, &
Milosevic, 2014). We consider complexity (Marion & Uhl-Bien, 2001;
Uhl-Bien & Marion, 2009) and adaptive leadership (Uhl-Bien & Arena,
2018) theories to be well suited for studying the role of context in
leadership processes. As mentioned above, qualitative methodologies
may also be beneficial in advancing knowledge about leadership con-
text.

As for their remaining content directions for leadership research,
Gardner et al. (2010, p. 951) stated that, from their “viewpoint there
was, relative to the need, a disappointing amount of attention paid to
Females as Leaders, International leadership, Leadership Systems, and
the impact of Technology on Leadership.” For two of these topical
areas–international leadership and the impact of technology on lea-
dership—such disappointment continues, as these topics were infre-
quently examined in LQ's third decade. Given the influence of culture

on leadership as documented by the GLOBE study (Chokkar, Brodbeck,
& House, 2007; Den Hartog, House, Hanges, Ruiz-Quintanilla, &
Dorfman, 1999; Dorfman, Javidan, Hanges, Dastmalchian, & House,
2012; Hanges, Aiken, Park, & Su, 2016; House, Dorfman, Javidan,
Hanges, & de Luque, 2014), greater attention to the manifestation and
effectiveness of leadership within an international arena is clearly
needed. Similarly, as more and more organizations embrace virtual
teams (Charlier, Stewart, Greco, & Reeves, 2016) and other forms of
technology that facilitates geographically-distributed decision-making
or management, the importance of e-leadership (Avolio, Kahai, &
Dodge, 2000) expands, warranting greater attention to the topic.

The good news is that the other two content topics recommended by
Gardner et al. (2010) have received an upswing in research attention.
Specifically, considerable attention has been devoted to leadership
development in LQ's third decade, as this served as the second most
common focal theory (5.8%) for articles published in the most recent
decade. Indeed, two special issues (Hannum & Craig, 2010; Riggio &
Mumford, 2011) and another forthcoming (Day, Riggio, Conger, & Tan,
2018) indicate current and continuing research interest in this domain.
Similarly, an increase in attention focused on leadership and diversi-
ty–the vast majority of which examines gender effects–is apparent from
the rise in the number of articles published from 1.9% in LQ's second
decade to 4.9% in the third decade. This rise was, in part, aided by a
special issue devoted to gender and leadership (Eagly & Heilman,
2016). While we find these trends encouraging, we recommend that
greater attention be devoted to the study of leadership systems, as re-
commended by Lowe and Gardner (2000), as well as other forms of
diversity (e.g., ethnicity, race, age, sexual orientation, personality,
functional training, cultural background, ability, and religion).

Revisiting Gardner et al.'s (2010) methodological recommendations

A summary of Gardner et al.'s (2010) methodological re-
commendations is provided in Table 20. The first involved a move away
from the field's reliance on a narrow set of retrospective survey mea-
sures [e.g., the Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire (Bass & Avolio,
1995) or the LMX-7 (Scandura & Graen, 1984)] as the definition of
leadership by expanding the use of real-time measurement (e.g., public
opinion polls) and more direct measures of leadership (e.g., content
analysis of leader speeches such as those conducted by (Bligh, Kohles, &
Meindl, 2004, a, 2004, b)).

Our review of LQ's third decade revealed that retrospective surveys
continue to be the dominant means of measuring leadership phe-
nomena, as 46.8% of quantitative studies used such measures, which is
an increase to that found in the prior decade (31%). Adding to concerns
about this methodology are our findings that most of the studies that
employed surveys also used convenience samples, raising concerns
about the representativeness of the findings. Additionally, we found
that it was common practice to introduce new survey measures, or
modify existing survey measures, without following best practices for
scale development and validation (DeVellis, 2017; Hinkin, 1998). Here,
it is noteworthy the current editor of LQ, John Antonakis (2019), pre-
dicted that

10 years from now, the typical leadership design using ques-
tionnaire measures of leadership style to predict outcomes, whether
objective or not, will be used less and less and there will be more of
a focus on objectively measured behavior, real-time and archival. At
this time overall the field in general does not yet fully recognize or
appreciate that typical questionnaire-type designs do not have much
to offer in terms of policy implications.

While alternative measures, such as content analysis (5.5%), diary
studies, and event sampling (0.7%) continue to be under-utilized, new
measures have been introduced to the field that may foreshadow this
predicted replacement of survey-based research. These include implicit
measures (Chong, Djurdjevic, & Johnson, 2017), facial expression

W.L. Gardner, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

22



coding (Trichas, 2017; Trichas, Schyns, Lord, & Hall, 2017), biosensor
measures (Cook & Meyer, 2017; Dixon, Webb, & Chang, 2017), com-
puter-assisted textual analysis (CATA; Davis & Gardner, 2012; Short,
Broberg, Cogliser, & Brigham, 2010), and social network measures
(Cullen-Lester & Yammarino, 2016). Given the availability and promise
of such measures, the time is ripe for researchers to heed this call and
wean themselves from their overreliance on retrospective surveys. We
also expect that the editorial board and the journal's leadership would
welcome methodological pieces that introduce why and how these
types of novel approaches could advance leadership research.

A second methodological recommendation advanced by Gardner
et al. (2010, p. 951) involves conducting more research using multiple
studies (e.g., Study 1, Study 2, etc.) “that richly and methodologically
demonstrate how a leadership phenomenon unfolds.” Our findings re-
vealed progress in reaching this goal during LQ's third decade, parti-
cularly during 2018, for which the average was 1.25 studies for every
LQ article published. We are optimistic that this trend will continue, as
reviewers and editors alike call for greater multi-study research to more
fully flesh out leadership processes and rule out competing explanations
for the relationships identified. This does not mean that we believe
articles that answer “big” questions are not called for. Instead, we be-
lieve that multi-study work can answer big questions a piece at a time,
yielding a stronger demonstration (perhaps even replicated ones) of the
leadership phenomenon of interest.

A third recommendation offered by Gardner et al. (2010, p. 951)
called for “research teams combining psychologists, sociologists, an-
thropologists, and cognitive scientists who can bring multiple per-
spectives and methodologies to the formation of research questions and
tests of hypotheses.” In this review we coded author discipline, with the
results summarized in Table 9. The findings revealed that roughly two-
thirds of authors are affiliated with management departments, and
22.1% with psychology departments, leaving only 10% for other dis-
ciplines. While we did not code for interdisciplinary teams per se, it is
clear that Gardner and colleagues' call for such teams has not been
answered, given the over-representation of management and psy-
chology faculty among LQ authors. On the one hand, given the in-
creasing diversification of LQ's editorial leadership and review board, it
would not be surprising to find that some of these scholars partner to
investigate leadership phenomena from a multi-disciplinary perspective
in the future, or that authors from diverse disciplines respond to the
signal sent by LQ's increasingly diverse disciplinary editorial leadership
and editorial board that such research would be welcome. On the other
hand, given well-entrenched barriers that exist to discourage inter-
disciplinary and transdisciplinary research (Hadorn et al., 2008), we
also would not be surprised if it remains relatively rare. Regardless of
the level of interdisciplinary leadership research conducted, we echo
Gardner et al.'s (2010) call for more interdisciplinary teams to produce
novel perspectives and approaches to studying leadership.

Gardner et al.'s (2010, p. 951) fourth recommendation called for “the
foci of cross-level studies to move toward understanding how leadership
is enacted and evaluated at different levels simultaneously.” Indeed,
Batistič, Černe, and Vogel (2017) found that the leadership field remains
fragmented, with only certain leadership models (shared leadership,
trust, complexity, context, and emotions/emotional intelligence) cur-
rently employing a levels-of-analysis approach for both their leadership
conceptualizations and associated outcomes (while other models such as
transformational leadership are declining in their multi-level study).
Accordingly, while we have witnessed a continuing increase in multi-
level research in our review, as our prior discussion of Lowe and
Gardner's (2000) suggestions indicated, we believe it is time for the field
to take Gardner et al.'s (2010, p. 951) recommendation to “treat cross-
level understanding of the phenomena as foreground and thereby make
partialing the statistical variance background when our goal is to under-
stand the effects of leaders and leadership at different levels.” This charge
to the field is further bolstered by a number of multi-level approach
recommendations made more recently in Batistič et al. (2017).

The fifth recommendation made by Gardner et al. (2010) calls for
greater use of controlled experiments to tease out causal relationships
among the antecedents and consequences of leadership. As noted in our
discussion of research methods, LQ's third decade has been character-
ized by more extensive use of experimental methods, as the proportion
of studies that employed such methods rose substantially in LQ's third
decade relative to the prior two. Perhaps this increase is in partial re-
sponse to Antonakis et al.'s (2010) call at the beginning of the decade
for more experimental research to address pervasive endogeneity con-
cerns that have plagued the leadership field, as well as the social sci-
ences in general. Nonetheless, we observed little use of the types of
quasi-experimental research Antonakis et al. advocated. Given the di-
versity and the utility of quasi-experimental studies for ascertaining
causal relations (Cook & Campbell, 1979), we echo the calls of Anto-
nakis and others (Antonakis, 2017, b; Antonakis et al., 2010; Grant &
Wall, 2009) for greater usage of this powerful methodology.

The sixth recommendation made by Gardner et al. (2010) called for
the use of alternative methodologies from other fields of study, such as
behavioral economics, narrative analytical techniques developed by
sociologists, and computer simulations pioneered by psychologists. As
we noted in our discussion of measures, the field of leadership has in-
creasingly borrowed from other disciplines to introduce more novel
approaches to studying leadership phenomena (Schyns, Hall, & Neves,
2017). In addition, the appointment of AEs from a wider array of dis-
ciplines including economics, evolutionary psychology, and political
science, as well the publication of special issues that demonstrate the
utility of methods from the fields of biology (van Vugt, 2018), neu-
roscience (Lee et al., 2012; van Vugt, 2018) and economics (Garretsen,
Stoker, & Weber, 2016) for studying leadership, suggests that the field
is poised to embrace a host of methods from other disciplines.

The seventh recommendation advanced by Gardner et al. (2010)
involved a call to test competing models through data analysis. While
our coding provides little insight into the extent to which this occurred,
our impression from reading the 615 articles published during LQ's
third decade is that such comparisons remain rare. Nonetheless, recent
meta-analyses by Banks, McCauley, Gardner, and Guler (2016) and
Hoch, Bommer, Dulebohn, and Wu (2018) that compared the predictive
utility of authentic, ethical, servant, and transformational leadership
demonstrate the value of such comparative analyses. We encourage
leadership researchers to follow these examples to conduct more ex-
tensive comparisons of leadership theories to assess their predictive
power and their boundary conditions.

Gardner et al.'s (2010) eighth recommendation is to devote greater
attention to the cognitive aspects of leaders and leadership. It appears
that progress has been made in this regard, as leader and follower
cognitions, implicit leadership theories, identity and identification
processes, social identity theory, and information processing and deci-
sion making–all focal theories that involve cognitive pro-
cesses—combined to account for 11.3% of focal theories. Additionally,
three special issues were dedicated to leadership and cognition (Foti,
Hansbrough, Epitropaki, & Coyle, 2017; Lee et al., 2012; Mumford,
Watts, & Partlow, 2015). Despite such progress, the fundamental im-
portance of leader and follower cognitions to the perception, emer-
gence, and enactment of leadership highlights the need for continuing
research in this domain.

Finally, Gardner et al. (2010) recommended that researchers draw
more extensively on technology to generate new insights into leader-
ship phenomena. As previously noted, our findings suggest that while
retrospective surveys continue to dominate as measures of leadership,
new applications of technology are gaining traction that promise to
expand our methodological tool chest including measures of facial ex-
pressions (Poutvaara, 2014; Trichas, 2017; Trichas et al., 2017), bio-
sensors (Dixon et al., 2017), implicit measures (Chong et al., 2017),
computer-assisted textual analysis (CATA; Davis & Gardner, 2012;
Short et al., 2010), and social network measures (Cullen-Lester &
Yammarino, 2016).

W.L. Gardner, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

23



Editor interviews

In addition to revisiting the content and methodological re-
commendations from prior reviews, we also interviewed, for purposes
of this manuscript, Mike Mumford, Leanne Atwater, and John
Antonakis, each of whom served as Editor-in-Chief during some portion
of The Leadership Quarterly's third decade. The editor interviews re-
inforced several of the themes discussed previously and also introduced
new topics. While a full discussion of the rich insights provided is be-
yond the scope of this manuscript, we briefly highlight ten themes.

One theme raised by the editors involved the need to pay more
attention to context (e.g. healthcare, education) as a boundary condi-
tion on our theories rather than searching for a single moderated
mediation model that can explain it all. A second theme was the need to
continue to reduce an overreliance on survey research utilizing mea-
sures that are underspecified for the richness of the phenomenon they
seek to measure. A third theme, related to the preceding point, is the
need to broaden the methods employed including increased usage of
simulations, robust experimental designs, and qualitative research
methods. A fourth theme was a general concern about construct pro-
liferation in the field. The increase in construct proliferation was per-
ceived to be at least, in part, driven by journals insisting on new the-
oretical development as normative. In contrast to pushing for the
development of new theory, a general sentiment was that devoting si-
milar effort to the development of better measurement of the constructs
currently in place, and more robust research designs to tease out the
nuances and boundary conditions of existing theories, would better
serve the field at this juncture. A fifth theme involved a recognition that
more needs to be done to understand how leadership demands are si-
milar, and different, at upper-middle and upper echelons of the orga-
nization. The editors noted that our current knowledge, which has
largely been obtained from middle level managers and lower level su-
pervisors, is better suited to informing undergraduates and other early
career workers. Related to this concern is that the reporting of leader-
ship research findings generally ignores both responsibility level in the
organization and the context in which leadership is practiced. This
challenge is exacerbated by one-size-fits-all theories that provide rela-
tively little guidance on the boundary conditions across contexts and
responsibility levels.

A sixth theme was the need to better understand the implications of
increasingly non-western samples in leadership research explored pre-
dominately through the lens of theory developed in first world, Anglo-
centric organizations. While the general feeling is that construct pro-
liferation and consistent pushes for new theoretical development may
not have served the field well, the need for theory development in non-
western settings or from non-western lenses may be a needed exception.
A seventh theme was the need to better integrate disciplinary per-
spectives on leadership. For example, psychology researchers typically
frame leadership as an outcome variable, whereas organizational be-
havior researchers typically frame leadership as a predictor variable. An
eighth theme was the need to better understand how technology,
especially the role of social media and the potential to be constantly
connected, is challenging how we define leadership and what is ex-
pected from leaders. The use of artificial intelligence and deep learning
will also be on the uptake, challenging both our understanding of lea-
dership and redefining the challenges leaders face. A ninth theme was
to provide more attention to how changing social norms influence
leadership challenges. As a recent example, the “#MeToo” movement
both raised social awareness and challenged social norms of often
quietly condoned behavior. At the same time the heightened attention
gave rise to new forms of backlash in cross-gender relationships. Thus,
gender and gendered dynamics specifically, and diversity in general,
will continue to require more attention than the field has generally
afforded the topics. Finally, a tenth theme reflected a need to better link
effective leadership to organizational outcomes. Leadership is generally
posited as one method for improving organizational-level performance.

Yet most leadership research focuses on individual level (leader) per-
formance or the relationship of leader behavior on group- (team-) level
performance. As a field, we have little evidence that these individual-
and group-level outcomes cumulatively increase organizational per-
formance. Thus, developing theories and measures of how leadership
systems impact the performance of organizational systems remains a
challenge for the field.

Conclusion

Since its founding in 1990, The Leadership Quarterly has provided
three decades of leadership for theory and research into the study and
practice of leadership phenomena. While our review of the content and
methodological recommendations offered in the reviews of LQ's first
and second decades revealed areas where only limited progress had
been made, it also revealed many encouraging developments. Based on
our assessment of LQ's third decade of publications, we conclude that it
is fulfilling its mission to advance “our understanding of leadership as a
phenomenon, how to study it, as well as its practical implications”
while studying “leaders from all walks of social life” and publishing
“scholarly research, theory, and developmental application from di-
verse fields of inquiry about leadership” (https://www.journals.
elsevier.com/the-leadership-quarterly). We also find that LQ's record
of publishing rigorous and innovative research during its first three
decades provides a basis for optimism that the journal, and the field,
will continue to expand our knowledge of leaders and leadership into
new frontiers. We look forward, with optimistic anticipation, to the
story LQ's fourth decade will tell about the evolution and study of
leadership.

References

Antonakis, J. (2017). Editorial: The future of The Leadership Quarterly. The Leadership
Quarterly, 28, 1–4.

Antonakis, J. (2017). On doing better science: From thrill of discovery to policy im-
plications. The Leadership Quarterly, 28, 5–21.

Antonakis, J. (2019). Personal communication. June 24, 2019.
Antonakis, J., Banks, G. C., Bastardoz, N., Cole, M. S., Day, D. V., Eagly, A. H., ... Weber,

R. (2019). The Leadership Quarterly: State of the journal. The Leadership Quarterly,
30, 1–9.

Antonakis, J., Bastardoz, N., Jacquart, P., & Shamir, B. (2016). Charisma: An ill-defined
and ill-measured gift. Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational
Behavior, 3, 293–319.

Antonakis, J., Bastardoz, N., Liu, Y., & Schriesheim, C. A. (2014). What makes articles
highly cited? The Leadership Quarterly, 25, 152–179.

Antonakis, J., Bendahan, S., Jacquart, P., & Lalive, R. (2010). On making causal claims: A
review and recommendations. The Leadership Quarterly, 21, 1086–1120.

Antonakis, J., & Gardner, W. L. (2017). Charisma: New frontiers: A special issue dedicated
to the memory of Boas Shamir. The Leadership Quarterly, 28, 471–472.

Arvey, R., Dhanaraj, C., Javidan, M., & Zhang, Z.-X. (2015). Are there unique leadership
models in Asia? Exploring uncharted territory. The Leadership Quarterly, 26, 1–6.

Atwater, L. (2016). Farewell. The Leadership Quarterly, 27, 819.
Atwater, L. E. (2011). Hello from the new editor. The Leadership Quarterly, 22, 8–9.
Atwater, L. E., Mumford, M. D., Schriesheim, C. A., & Yammarino, F. J. (2014). Retraction

of leadership articles: Causes and prevention. The Leadership Quarterly, 25,
1174–1180.

Avolio, B. J., Kahai, S., & Dodge, G. E. (2000). E-leadership: Implications for theory,
research, and practice. The Leadership Quarterly, 11, 615–668.

Banks, G. C., Dionne, S. D., Sayama, H., & Mast, M. S. (2019). Special issue: Call for
papers. Leadership in the digital era: Social media, big data, virtual reality, and deep
learning. The Leadership Quarterly, 30(3), I–II.

Banks, G. C., Gooty, J., Ross, R. L., Williams, C. E., & Harrington, N. T. (2018). Construct
redundancy in leader behaviors: A review and agenda for the future. The Leadership
Quarterly, 29, 236–251.

Banks, G. C., McCauley, K. D., Gardner, W. L., & Guler, C. E. (2016). A meta-analytic
review of authentic and transformational leadership: A test for redundancy. The
Leadership Quarterly, 27, 634–652.

Bass, B. M., & Avolio, B. J. (1995). Manual for the multifactor leadership questionnaire: Rater
form (5X short). Palo Alto, CA: Mind Garden.

Batistič, S., Černe, M., & Vogel, B. (2017). Just how multi-level is leadership research? A
document co-citation analysis 1980–2013 on leadership constructs and outcomes.
The Leadership Quarterly, 28, 86–103.

Battilana, J., Gilmartin, M., Sengul, M., Pache, A. C., & Alexander, J. A. (2010).
Leadership competencies for implementing planned organizational change. The
Leadership Quarterly, 21, 422–438.

Biemann, T., Cole, M. S., & Voelpel, S. (2012). Within-group agreement: On the use (and

W.L. Gardner, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

24

https://www.journals.elsevier.com/the-leadership-quarterly
https://www.journals.elsevier.com/the-leadership-quarterly
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf8095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf8095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf8095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf7095


misuse) of rWG and rWG (J) in leadership research and some best practice guidelines.
The Leadership Quarterly, 23, 66–80.

Bliese, P. D., Halverson, R. R., & Schriesheim, C. A. (2002). Benchmarking multilevel
methods in leadership: The articles, the model, and the data set. The Leadership
Quarterly, 13, 3–14.

Bligh, M. C., Kohles, J. C., & Meindl, J. R. (2004a). Charisma under crisis: Presidential
leadership, rhetoric, and media responses before and after the September 11th ter-
rorist attacks. The Leadership Quarterly, 15, 211–239.

Bligh, M. C., Kohles, J. C., & Meindl, J. R. (2004b). Charting the language of leadership: A
methodological investigation of President Bush and the crisis of 9/11. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 89, 562–574.

Bonardi, J.-P., Hitt, M. A., Vera, D., & Withers, M. C. (2018). Call for papers. Special issue
on strategic leadership and strategic management. The Leadership Quarterly, 29(3),
VII–VIII.

Braun, S., Peus, C., Weisweiler, S., & Frey, D. (2013). Transformational leadership, job
satisfaction, and team performance: A multilevel mediation model of trust. The
Leadership Quarterly, 24, 270–283.

Carlson, D., Ferguson, M., Hunter, E., & Whitten, D. (2012). Abusive supervision and
work–family conflict: The path through emotional labor and burnout. The Leadership
Quarterly, 23, 849–859.

Carsten, M. K., Uhl-Bien, M., West, B. J., Patera, J. L., & McGregor, R. (2010). Exploring
social constructions of followership: A qualitative study. The Leadership Quarterly, 21,
543–562.

Cavazotte, F., Moreno, V., & Hickmann, M. (2012). Effects of leader intelligence, per-
sonality and emotional intelligence on transformational leadership and managerial
performance. The Leadership Quarterly, 23, 443–455.

Charlier, S. D., Stewart, G. L., Greco, L. M., & Reeves, C. J. (2016). Emergent leadership in
virtual teams: A multilevel investigation of individual communication and team
dispersion antecedents. The Leadership Quarterly, 27, 745–764.

Chen, A. S. Y., & Hou, Y. H. (2016). The effects of ethical leadership, voice behavior and
climates for innovation on creativity: A moderated mediation examination. The
Leadership Quarterly, 27, 1–13.

Cho, J., & Dansereau, F. (2010). Are transformational leaders fair? A multi-level study of
transformational leadership, justice perceptions, and organizational citizenship be-
haviors. The Leadership Quarterly, 21, 409–421.

Chokkar, J. S., Brodbeck, F. C., & House, R. J. (2007). Culture and leadership across the
world: The GLOBE book of in-depth studies of 25 societies. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Chong, S., Djurdjevic, E., & Johnson, R. E. (2017). Implicit measures in leadership. In B.
Schyns, R. Hall, & P. Neves (Eds.). Handbook of methods in leadership research (pp. 13–
47). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.

Cook, A. S., & Meyer, B. (2017). Assessing leadership behavior with observational and
sensor-based methods: A brief overview. In B. Schyns, R. J. Hall, & P. Neves (Eds.).
Handbook of methods in leadership research (pp. 73–102). Cheltenham, UK: Edward
Elgar.

Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (1979). Quasi-experimentation: Design and analysis issues for
field settings. Chicago: Rand-McNally.

Côté, S., Lopes, P. N., Salovey, P., & Miners, C. T. (2010). Emotional intelligence and
leadership emergence in small groups. The Leadership Quarterly, 21, 496–508.

Cresswell, J. W., & Poth, C. N. (2018). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing
among five approaches (4th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Crosby, B. C., & Bryson, J. M. (2010). Integrative leadership and the creation and
maintenance of cross-sector collaborations. The Leadership Quarterly, 21, 211–230.

Cullen-Lester, K. L., & Yammarino, F. J. (2016). Collective and network approaches to
leadership: Special issue introduction. The Leadership Quarterly, 27, 173–180.

Davis, K. M., & Gardner, W. L. (2012). Charisma under crisis revisited: Presidential lea-
dership, long-term follower effects and contextual influence. The Leadership Quarterly,
23, 918–923.

Day, D. V. (2018). The Leadership Quarterly yearly review: Pushing the frontiers of lea-
dership scholarship. The Leadership Quarterly, 29(1), 1.

Day, D. V. (2019). The Leadership Quarterly yearly review: State-of-the-science reviews on
leadership theory, methods, and measurement. The Leadership Quarterly, 30(1), 10.

Day, D. V., Fleenor, J. W., Atwater, L. E., Sturm, R. E., & McKee, R. A. (2014). Advances in
leader and leadership development: A review of 25 years of research and theory. The
Leadership Quarterly, 25, 63–82.

Day, D. V., Riggio, R., Conger, J., & Tan, S. (2018). Call for papers. 21st century lea-
dership development: Bridging science and practice. The Leadership Quarterly,
29(6), I.

de Kluyver, C. A., & Pearce, J. A., II (2015). Strategic management: An exective perspective.
New York: Business Expert Press.

Den Hartog, D. N., House, R. J., Hanges, P. J., Ruiz-Quintanilla, S. A., & Dorfman, P. W.
(1999). Culture specific and cross-culturally generalizable implicit leadership the-
ories: Are attributes of charismatic/transformational leadership universally en-
dorsed? The Leadership Quarterly, 10, 219–256.

DeVellis, R. F. (2017). Scale development: Theory and applications (4th ed.). Los Angeles,
CA: Sage.

Dinh, J. E., Lord, R. G., Gardner, W. L., Meuser, J. D., Liden, R. C., & Hu, J. (2014).
Leadership theory and research in the new millennium: Current theoretical trends
and changing perspectives. The Leadership Quarterly, 25, 36–62.

Dionne, S. D. (2017). The Leadership Quarterly yearly review: Multidisciplinary, multi-
level, multisource, multiskilled and multigenerational perspectives. The Leadership
Quarterly, 28, 22–23.

Dixon, A. J., Webb, J. M., & Chang, C.-H. D. (2017). Biosensor approaches to studying
leadership. In B. Schyns, & R. J. Hall (Eds.). Handbook of methods in leadership research
(pp. 146–169). Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar.

Dorfman, P. W., Javidan, M., Hanges, P. J., Dastmalchian, A., & House, R. (2012). GLOBE:
A twenty year journey into the intriguing world of culture and leadership. Journal of

World Business, 47, 504–518.
Eagly, A. H., & Heilman, M. E. (2016). Gender and leadership: Introduction to the special

issue. The Leadership Quarterly, 27, 349–353.
Edwards, J. R. (2001). Ten difference score myths. Organizational Research Methods, 4,

265–287.
Edwards, J. R., & Cable, D. M. (2009). The value of value congruence. Journal of Applied

Psychology, 94, 654–677.
Eisenbeiss, S. A. (2012). Re-thinking ethical leadership: An interdisciplinary integrative

approach. The Leadership Quarterly, 23, 791–808.
Ely, K., Boyce, L. A., Nelson, J. K., Zaccaro, S. J., Hernez-Broome, G., & Whyman, W.

(2010). Evaluating leadership coaching: A review and integrated framework. The
Leadership Quarterly, 21, 585–599.

Epitropaki, O., Sy, T., Martin, R., Tram-Quon, S., & Topakas, A. (2013). Implicit leader-
ship and followership theories “in the wild”: Taking stock of information-processing
approaches to leadership and followership in organizational settings. The Leadership
Quarterly, 24, 858–881.

Fairhurst, G. T., & Uhl-Bien, M. (2012). Organizational discourse analysis (ODA):
Examining leadership as a relational process. The Leadership Quarterly, 23,
1043–1062.

Fleenor, J. W., Smither, J. W., Atwater, L. E., Braddy, P. W., & Sturm, R. E. (2010).
Self–other rating agreement in leadership: A review. The Leadership Quarterly, 21,
1005–1034.

Fleiss, J. L. (1981). Statistical methods for rates and proportions. NewYork: Wiley.
Foti, R. J., Hansbrough, T. K., Epitropaki, O., & Coyle, P. T. (2017). Dynamic viewpoints

on implicit leadership and followership theories: Approaches, findings, and future
directions. The Leadership Quarterly, 28, 261–267.

Gao, L., Janssen, O., & Shi, K. (2011). Leader trust and employee voice: The moderating
role of empowering leader behaviors. The Leadership Quarterly, 22, 787–798.

Gardner, W. L., Cogliser, C. C., Davis, K. M., & Dickens, M. P. (2011). Authentic leader-
ship: A review of the literature and research agenda. The Leadership Quarterly, 22,
1120–1145.

Gardner, W. L., Lowe, K. B., Moss, T. W., Mahoney, K. T., & Cogliser, C. C. (2010).
Scholarly leadership of the study of leadership: A review of The Leadership Quarterly’s
second decade, 2000–2009. The Leadership Quarterly, 21, 922–958.

Garretsen, H., Stoker, J., & Weber, R. (2016). Economics and leadership: Special issue for
The Leadership Quarterly. The Leadership Quarterly, 27, 912–913.

Garretsen, H., Stoker, J., & Weber, R. (2017). Special issue: Call for Papers. Economics and
leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 27(6), 912–913.

Gooty, J., Connelly, S., Griffith, J., & Gupta, A. (2010). Leadership, affect and emotions: A
state of the science review. The Leadership Quarterly, 21, 979–1004.

Gooty, J., Serban, A., Thomas, J. S., Gavin, M. B., & Yammarino, F. J. (2012). Use and
misuse of levels of analysis in leadership research: An illustrative review of lea-
der–member exchange. The Leadership Quarterly, 23, 1080–1103.

Gooty, J., & Yammarino, F. J. (2011). Dyads in organizational research: Conceptual issues
and multi-level analyses. Organizational Research Methods, 14, 456–483.

Grant, A. M., & Wall, T. D. (2009). The neglected science and art of quasi-experimenta-
tion: Why-to, when-to, and how-to advice for organizational researchers.
Organizational Research Methods, 12, 653–686.

Hadorn, G. H., Hoffmann-Riem, H., Biber-Klemm, S., Grossenbacher-Mansuy, W., Joye,
D., Pohl, C., ... Zemp, E. (Eds.). (2008). Handbook of transdisciplinary research.
Springer.

Hanges, P. J., Aiken, J. R., Park, J., & Su, J. (2016). Cross-cultural leadership: Leading
around the world. Current Opinion in Psychology, 8, 64–69.

Hannum, K. M., & Craig, S. B. (2010). Introduction to special issue on leadership devel-
opment evaluation. The Leadership Quarterly, 21, 581–582.

Harms, P. D., Spain, S. M., & Hannah, S. T. (2011). Leader development and the dark side
of personality. The Leadership Quarterly, 22, 495–509.

Harris, K. J., Wheeler, A. R., & Kacmar, K. M. (2011). The mediating role of organizational
job embeddedness in the LMX–outcomes relationships. The Leadership Quarterly, 22,
271–281.

Hernandez, M., Eberly, M. B., Avolio, B. J., & Johnson, M. D. (2011). The loci and me-
chanisms of leadership: Exploring a more comprehensive view of leadership theory.
The Leadership Quarterly, 22, 1165–1185.

Hinkin, T. R. (1998). A brief tutorial on the development of measures for use in survey
questionnaires. Organizational Research Methods, 1, 104–121.

Hoch, J. E., Bommer, W. H., Dulebohn, J. H., & Wu, D. (2018). Do ethical, authentic, and
servant leadership explain variance above and beyond transformational leadership?
A meta-analysis. Journal of Management, 44, 501–529.

Hoppe, B., & Reinelt, C. (2010). Social network analysis and the evaluation of leadership
networks. The Leadership Quarterly, 21, 600–619.

House, R. J., Dorfman, P. W., Javidan, M., Hanges, P. J., & de Luque, M. S. (2014).
Strategic leadership across cultures: The GLOBE study of CEO leadership behavior and
effectiveness in 24 countries. Los Angeles: Sage.

Hunt, J. (2000). Comments from the yearly review editor. The Leadership Quarterly, 11,
431–432.

Hunter, J. E., & Schmidt, F. L. (2004). Methods of meta-analysis: Correcting error and bias in
research findings. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications.

Hunter, E. M., Neubert, M. J., Perry, S. J., Witt, L. A., Penney, L. M., & Weinberger, E.
(2013). Servant leaders inspire servant followers: Antecedents and outcomes for
employees and the organization. The Leadership Quarterly, 24, 316–331.

James, L. R., Demaree, R. G., & Wolfe, G. (1984). Estimating within-group interrater
reliability with and without response bias. Journal of Applied Psychology, 69, 85–98.

Judge, T. A., & Bono, J. E. (2000). Five factor model of personality and transformational
leadership. Journal of Applied Psychology, 85, 751–765.

Judge, T. A., Colbert, A. E., & Ilies, R. (2004). Intelligence and leadership: A quantitative
review and test of theoretical propositions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89,

W.L. Gardner, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

25

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf7095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf7095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf8110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf8110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf8110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf83283
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf83283
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf83283
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf372943
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf372943
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf372943
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/optWgzzR1Tg4N
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/optWgzzR1Tg4N
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/optWgzzR1Tg4N
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf526153
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf526153
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf526153
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf21322
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf21322
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf21322
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf536536
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf536536
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf354343245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf354343245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0145
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf5005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf5005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf5005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf4653744
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf4653744
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf4653744
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf5436543
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf5436543
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf5436543
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf5436543
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/optTM8NgrhBWl
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/optTM8NgrhBWl
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/optTM8NgrhBWl
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf37623
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf37623
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf37623
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/optDup68goMHt
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/optDup68goMHt
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf6546546
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf6546546
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf6546546
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf9115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf9115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/optsvM4msB9FR
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/optsvM4msB9FR
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0250
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf2537523
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf2537523
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf4363264
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf4363264
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf4363264
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf384483
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf384483
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf384483
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf343443
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf343443
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf6320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf6320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf435352
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf435352
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf435352
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0300


542–552.
Judge, T. A., Piccolo, R. F., & Kosalka, T. (2009). The bright and dark sides of leader

traits: A review and theoretical extension of the leader trait paradigm. The Leadership
Quarterly, 20, 855–875.

Kalshoven, K., Den Hartog, & De Hoogh, A. H. (2011). Ethical leadership at work ques-
tionnaire (ELW): Development and validation of a multidimensional measure. The
Leadership Quarterly, 22, 51–69.

Kruschke, J. K., Aguinis, H., & Joo, H. (2012). The time has come: Bayesian methods for
data analysis in the organizational sciences. Organizational Research Methods, 15,
722–752.

Ladkin, D., & Taylor, S. S. (2010). Enacting the “true self”: Towards a theory of embodied
authentic leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 21, 64–74.

Landis, J. R., & Koch, G. G. (1977). The measurement of observer agreement for cate-
gorical data. Biometrics, 33, 159–174.

Leavitt, K., Mitchell, T. R., & Peterson, J. (2010). Theory pruning: Strategies to reduce our
dense theoretical landscape. Organizational Research Methods, 13, 644–667.

Lee, N., Senior, C., & Butler, M. (2012). Leadership research and cognitive neuroscience:
The state of this union. The Leadership Quarterly, 23, 213–218.

Liu, W., Zhu, R., & Yang, Y. (2010). I warn you because I like you: Voice behavior, em-
ployee identifications, and transformational leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 21,
189–202.

Lord, R. G., Day, D. V., Zaccaro, S. J., Avolio, B. J., & Eagly, A. H. (2017). Leadership in
applied psychology: Three waves of theory and research. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 102, 434–451.

Lowe, K. B., & Gardner, W. L. (2000). Ten years of The Leadership Quarterly: Contributions
and challenges for the future. The Leadership Quarterly, 11, 459–514.

Mann, R. D. (1959). A review of the relationship between personality and performance in
small groups. Psychological Bulletin, 56, 241–270.

Marion, R., & Uhl-Bien, M. (2001). Leadership in complex organizations. The Leadership
Quarterly, 12, 389–418.

Meuser, J. D., Gardner, W. L., Dinh, J. E., Hu, J., Liden, R. C., & Lord, R. G. (2016). A
network analysis of leadership theory: The infancy of integration. Journal of
Management, 42, 1374–1403.

Mumford, M. D. (2005). Something old, something new: The mission of The Leadership
Quarterly. The Leadership Quarterly, 16, 9–15.

Mumford, M. D. (2011). A hale farewell: The state of leadership research. The Leadership
Quarterly, 22, 1–7.

Mumford, M. D., Watts, L. L., & Partlow, P. J. (2015). Leader cognition: Approaches and
findings. The Leadership Quarterly, 26, 301–306.

Neider, L. L., & Schriesheim, C. A. (2011). The authentic leadership inventory (ALI):
Development and empirical tests. The Leadership Quarterly, 22, 1146–1164.

Norman, S. M., Avolio, B. J., & Luthans, F. (2010). The impact of positivity and trans-
parency on trust in leaders and their perceived effectiveness. The Leadership Quarterly,
21, 350–364.

Olk, P., & Griffith, T. L. (2004). Creating and disseminating knowledge among organi-
zational scholars: The role of special issues. Organization Science, 15, 120–129.

Osborn, R. N., Uhl-Bien, M., & Milosevic, I. (2014). The context and leadership. In D. V.
Day (Ed.). The Oxford handbook of leadership and organizations (pp. 589–612). Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.

Piccolo, R. F., Bono, J. E., Heinitz, K., Rowold, J., Duehr, E., & Judge, T. A. (2012). The
relative impact of complementary leader behaviors: Which matter most? The
Leadership Quarterly, 23, 567–581.

Poutvaara, P. (2014). Facial appearance and leadership: An overview and challenges for
new research. The Leadership Quarterly, 25, 801–804.

Riggio, R. E., & Mumford, M. D. (2011). Introduction to the special issue: Longitudinal
studies of leadership development. The Leadership Quarterly, 22, 453–456.

Rosing, K., Frese, M., & Bausch, A. (2011). Explaining the heterogeneity of the leadership-
innovation relationship: Ambidextrous leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 22,
956–974.

Scandura, T. A., & Graen, G. B. (1984). Moderating effects of initial leader-member ex-
change status on the effects of a leadership intervention. Journal of Applied Science,
69, 428–436.

Scandura, T. A., & Williams, E. A. (2000). Research methodology in management: Current
practices, trends, and implications for future research. Academy of Management
Journal, 43, 1248–1264.

Schriesheim, C. A. (2012). The Leadership Quarterly yearly review for 2012:
Methodological advances in leadership research. The Leadership Quarterly, 23, 993.

Schriesheim, C. A. (2013). The Leadership Quarterly yearly review for 2013: Advances in
traditional leadership theory and research. The Leadership Quarterly, 24, 797.

Schriesheim, C. A. (2014). The Leadership Quarterly yearly review for 2014: Advances in
traditional leadership theory and research part II. The Leadership Quarterly, 25, 1079.

Schyns, B., Hall, R. J., & Neves, P. (Eds.). (2017). Handbook of methods in leadership re-
search. Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar Publishing.

Schyns, B., & Schilling, J. (2013). How bad are the effects of bad leaders? A meta-analysis
of destructive leadership and its outcomes. The Leadership Quarterly, 24, 138–158.

Shamir, B. (2011). Leadership takes time: Some implications of (not) taking time seriously
in leadership research. The Leadership Quarterly, 22, 307–315.

Shondrick, S. J., Dinh, J. E., & Lord, R. G. (2010). Developments in implicit leadership
theory and cognitive science: Applications to improving measurement and under-
standing alternatives to hierarchical leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 21,
959–978.

Short, J. C., Broberg, J. C., Cogliser, C. C., & Brigham, K. C. (2010). Construct validation
using computer-aided text analysis (CATA): An illustration using entrepreneurial
orientation. Organizational Research Methods, 13, 320–347.

Smith, D. R., Leggat, P. A., & Araki, S. (2012). Assessing the bibliometric performance of a
“special issue”: A citation analysis using the Web of Science(R) database. European
Science Editing, 38, 88–90.

Sofaer, S. (1999). Qualitative methods: What are they and why use them? Health Services
Research, 34, 1101–1118.

Stogdill, R. M. (1948). Personal factors associated with leadership: A survey of the lit-
erature. Journal of Psychology, 25, 35–71.

Sun, L. Y., Zhang, Z., Qi, J., & Chen, Z. X. (2012). Empowerment and creativity: A cross-
level investigation. The Leadership Quarterly, 23, 55–65.

Tims, M., Bakker, A. B., & Xanthopoulou, D. (2011). Do transformational leaders enhance
their followers’ daily work engagement? The Leadership Quarterly, 22, 121–131.

Trichas, S. (2017). The contribution of sophisticated facial expression coding to leader-
ship research. In B. Schyns, R. J. Hall, & P. Neves (Eds.). Handbook of research methods
in leadership research (pp. 103–126). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.

Trichas, S., Schyns, B., Lord, R., & Hall, R. (2017). “Facing” leaders: Facial expression and
leadership perception. The Leadership Quarterly, 28, 317–333.

Uhl-Bien, M. (2008). “A noble endeavor”: Comments from the yearly review editor. The
Leadership Quarterly, 19, 632–633.

Uhl-Bien, M., & Arena, M. (2018). Leadership for organizational adaptability: A theore-
tical synthesis and integrative framework. The Leadership Quarterly, 29, 89–104.

Uhl-Bien, M., & Marion, R. (2009). Complexity leadership in bureaucratic forms of or-
ganizing: A meso model. The Leadership Quarterly, 20, 631–650.

Uhl-Bien, M., Riggio, R. E., Lowe, K. B., & Carsten, M. K. (2014). Followership theory: A
review and research agenda. The Leadership Quarterly, 25, 83–104.

Van Dierendonck, D., Stam, D., Boersma, P., De Windt, N., & Alkema, J. (2014). Same
difference? Exploring the differential mechanisms linking servant leadership and
transformational leadership to follower outcomes. The Leadership Quarterly, 25,
544–562.

van Eck, N. J., & Waltman, L. (2017). VOSviewer manual (version 1.6.6). Universiteit
Leiden/CWTS Meaningful Metrics October 23.

Van Knippenberg, D. (2011). Embodying who we are: Leader group prototypicality and
leadership effectiveness. The Leadership Quarterly, 22, 1078–1091.

van Knippenberg, D., & Sitkin, S. B. (2013). A critical assessment of charismatic-trans-
formational leadership research: Back to the drawing board? The Academy of
Management Annals, 7, 1–60.

van Vugt, M. (2018). Evolutionary, biological, and neuroscience perspectives. In J.
Antonakis, & D. V. Day (Eds.). The nature of leadership (pp. 189–217). Los Angeles:
Sge.

Vecchio, R. P., Justin, J. E., & Pearce, C. L. (2010). Empowering leadership: An ex-
amination of mediating mechanisms within a hierarchical structure. The Leadership
Quarterly, 21, 530–542.

Vinkenburg, C. J., Van Engen, Eagly, A. H., & Johannesen-Schmidt, M. C. (2011). An
exploration of stereotypical beliefs about leadership styles: Is transformational lea-
dership a route to women’s promotion? The Leadership Quarterly, 22, 10–21.

Volmer, J., Spurk, D., & Niessen, C. (2012). Leader–member exchange (LMX), job au-
tonomy, and creative work involvement. The Leadership Quarterly, 23, 456–465.

Wang, H., Tsui, A. S., & Xin, K. R. (2011). CEO leadership behaviors, organizational
performance, and employees’ attitudes. The Leadership Quarterly, 22, 92–105.

Yammarino, F. J. (1998). Multivariate aspects of the varient/WABA approach: A dis-
cussion and leadership illustration. The Leadership Quarterly, 9, 203–227.

Yammarino, F. J. (2010). The Leadership Quarterly yearly review for 2010: A scholarly
tribute to Bernard M. Bass and James G. Hunt. The Leadership Quarterly, 21, 917–919.

Yang, J., & Mossholder, K. W. (2010). Examining the effects of trust in leaders: A bases-
and-foci approach. The Leadership Quarterly, 21, 50–63.

Yukl, G. A., & Gardner, W. L. (2020). Leadership in organizations (9th ed.). Boston:
Pearson.

Zhang, A. Y., Tsui, A. S., & Wang, D. X. (2011). Leadership behaviors and group creativity
in Chinese organizations: The role of group processes. The Leadership Quarterly, 22,
851–862.

Zhao, H., & Li, C. (2019). A computerized approach to understanding leadership research.
The Leadership Quarterly, 30, 396–416.

Zhu, J., Song, L. J., Zhu, L., & Johnson, R. E. (2019). Visualizing the landscape and
evolution of leadership research. The Leadership Quarterly, 30, 215–232.

Zhu, W., Newman, A., Miao, Q., & Hooke, A. (2013). Revisiting the mediating role of trust
in transformational leadership effects: Do different types of trust make a difference?
The Leadership Quarterly, 24, 94–105.

W.L. Gardner, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101379

26

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf457534
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf457534
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf457534
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/optI39mhHMG1E
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/optI39mhHMG1E
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/optZo1Anb5Q2B
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/optZo1Anb5Q2B
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/optZo1Anb5Q2B
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf86876
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf86876
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf35232
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf35232
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf35232
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf65434
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf65434
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf65434
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/opthRSv884tGP
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/opthRSv884tGP
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/opthRSv884tGP
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf4356
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf4356
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/opt7LuJPXJp7C
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/opt7LuJPXJp7C
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/opt7LuJPXJp7C
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/opt7LuJPXJp7C
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/cf25332
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/cf25332
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf543532
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf543532
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf48734
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf48734
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf6356253
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf6356253
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf6356253
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf6356253
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/cf4343
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/cf4343
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf374932
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf374932
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf374932
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf53432436543
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf53432436543
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf53432436543
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf5624
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf5624
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf5435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf5435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf463264
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf463264
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/opt2zWYil9YV4
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/opt2zWYil9YV4
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/opt2zWYil9YV4
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf5352
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf5352
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30843-9/rf5352


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

The Leadership Quarterly

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua

Review

Viva la evolution: Using dual-strategies theory to explain leadership in
modern organizations

Kaylene J. McClanahan
Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University, United States of America

A B S T R A C T

Research from multiple fields suggests that throughout human history, leaders ascended the hierarchy through one of two strategies—dominance (using force or
coercion to gain control) or prestige (demonstrating competence and generosity so others follow of their own volition). The dual-strategies theory of social rank
suggests that these two strategies are still inherent in human psychology, and that consideration of dominance and prestige can help explain hierarchy and leadership
in modern social groups. Thus far, research on dual-strategies theory has developed without significant cross-fertilization from the literature on leadership within
organizational settings. In this review, I provide the first examination of dual-strategies theory within the context of broader leadership research, highlighting a) the
unique contributions of dual-strategies theory, b) current workforce trends that make dual-strategies theory particularly applicable to modern organizations, and c)
key limitations of dual-strategies theory that could be addressed by integrating leadership theory.

In the last two decades, evolutionary social psychologists have
proposed a new framework for classifying and thinking about in-
dividuals' approaches to social hierarchy. This framework—the dual-
strategies theory of social rank—suggests that attempts to gain and
maintain positions of high social rank can be categorized as one of two
strategies: dominance or prestige (Maner & Case, 2016). A dominant
style is characterized by the use of force or coercion to claim social
power. In contrast, a prestige-based approach typically involves de-
monstrating valued traits such as competence and generosity so others
follow the leader of their own volition. This theory is gaining traction in
social and evolutionary psychology, as evidenced by the number of
papers in this area published in top psychology journals over the past
decade (e.g., Case, Bae, & Maner, 2018; Case & Maner, 2014; Cheng &
Tracy, 2013; Cheng, Tracy, Foulsham, Kingstone, & Henrich, 2013;
Halevy, Chou, Cohen, & Livingston, 2012; Maner & Mead, 2010;
Witkower, Tracy, Cheng, & Henrich, in press; see Case & Maner, 2016
and Maner, 2017 for reviews).

Despite asking similar questions, research on dual-strategies theory
has thus far developed without significant cross-fertilization from the
larger body of research on leadership in organizations. In the following,
I address the divide between these two literatures by providing the first
examination of the dual-strategies theory of social rank within the
context of broader leadership theory. The aim of this review is to in-
troduce dual-strategies theory to leadership researchers who may be
unfamiliar with it, clarify the unique contributions of the dual-strate-
gies theory of social rank, and describe the potential benefits of cross-
fertilization from these two literatures. Finally, I argue that although
dual-strategies theory has not been extensively studied in

organizational settings, it is a particularly useful theory for under-
standing many modern employment contexts.

In order to situate the dual-strategies theory of social rank within
the context of the broader leadership theory and research, I first define
social rank, power, status, and leadership. Next, I briefly introduce the
dual-strategies theory of social rank, including the intellectual tradi-
tions that gave birth to the theory. With this introduction complete, I
take three steps to position this theory within the context of the orga-
nizational behavior literature on leadership. First, I describe a few of
the most prominent leadership theories and compare and contrast these
theories with dual-strategies theory. Second, I describe the unique focus
and contributions of dual-strategies theory relative to organizational
behavior literature on leadership and argue that this theory offers un-
ique explanatory value that is increasingly pertinent to the modern
workforce. Third, to demonstrate how principles from the broader re-
search on literature can provide fertile theoretical ground for future
research within dual-strategies theory, I take a few select concepts from
the literature on leadership and describe how they can be applied to
dual-strategies theory to generate and answer important empirical
questions.

Defining key terms

Definitions of leadership, social rank, power, and status are plen-
tiful, varied, and seldom agreed upon (Bass & Bass, 2008; Blader &
Chen, 2014; Northouse, 2018). Given that this review draws from lit-
erature in organizational behavior, social psychology, and evolutionary
anthropology, all of whom use these terms differently, defining each of

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101315
Received 16 November 2018; Received in revised form 30 August 2019; Accepted 3 September 2019

E-mail address: k-mcclanahan@kellogg.northwestern.edu.

The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101315

Available online 18 October 2019
1048-9843/ © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

T

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/10489843
https://www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101315
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101315
mailto:k-mcclanahan@kellogg.northwestern.edu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101315
http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101315&domain=pdf


these key terms is a crucial first step in exploring how these two bodies
of literature relate to each other.

Social rank

The concept of social rank is central to dual-strategies theory and is
defined as one's position within a hierarchy, where hierarchy is a “rank
order of individuals or groups on a valued social dimension” (Magee &
Galinsky, 2008, p. 354). A person with high social rank is a person with
a position near the top of the hierarchy.

There are a few points worth clarifying about this conception of
social rank. First, a person's social rank is relative: it depends on their
immediate reference group. For example, in formal organizational
hierarchies, many employees serve as both managers and sub-
ordinates—a manager might be in a position of high social rank when
interfacing with her subordinates, but might have average or even low
social rank when interacting with other managers in firm. Second,
hierarchies can be either formal or informal: a job title conveys an in-
dividual's position within the organization's formal hierarchy, but cer-
tain individuals might also be informally deferred to more than others
with the same job title, giving them a higher position within the in-
formal hierarchy. Similarly, even in social groups where there is no
formal hierarchy—for example, a book club—informal hierarchies
often emerge: a book club member who makes insightful contributions
to the discussion and has an outsized influence on book selection might
be considered to have high social rank despite his/her lack of formal
title. Third, within a given social group, multiple hierarchies can, and
generally do, exist (Greer & van Kleef, 2010). In other words, in-
dividuals may be ranked on different dimensions. For example, one
member of a work team might be considered a leader in technical ex-
pertise, while another is considered a leader in client engagement.
Social rank can refer to one's location on one of these specific dimen-
sions or the aggregate of all possible hierarchies. Finally, hierarchies
can be characterized by power or status (Hays & Bendersky, 2015), a
distinction described in more detail below.

Power and status
Theory and empirical research suggest that power and status re-

present distinct types of social rank and therefore are related but dis-
tinct constructs (Anicich, Fast, Halevy, & Galinsky, 2016; Bendersky &
Hays, 2012; Fast, Halevy, & Galinsky, 2012). This distinction is im-
portant to understanding dual-strategies theory (Case, Bae, & Maner,
2018; Maner & Case, 2016).

Power is the asymmetric control of valued resources in social re-
lationships (Galinsky, Rucker, & Magee, 2015; Magee & Galinsky,
2008). A key feature of power is the asymmetry between group mem-
bers: because the powerful control important resources, group members
with less power are dependent upon them (Galinsky et al., 2015). In
contrast, the powerful remain less dependent on others to get what they
want. Additionally, individuals can hold power by either controlling
resources that are desirable (i.e., an individual has a resource that
group members want access to) or that are undesirable (i.e., an in-
dividual controls negative outcomes, such as punishment or cost-in-
flicting tasks, that group members seek to avoid; Magee & Galinsky,
2008). Both of these reflect the asymmetric dependence and resource
control that characterize power-based hierarchies.

In contrast to the control focus of power, status refers to “the re-
spect, admiration, and voluntary deference an individual is afforded by
others” (Anderson, Hildreth, & Howland, 2015, p. 575). Crucially,
status is in the eye of the perceivers: one cannot “seize” status the way
one could “seize” power, as it is only granted by other members of the
group (Blader & Chen, 2014). Some organizational behavior research
designates status as formal positions of power and esteem as the ad-
miration and respect of others (cf. Bass & Bass, 2008), but this is in-
consistent with how the term “status” is used in social psychology (and
this review). Rather, research on social rank defines status as to

something closer to what these researchers would call “esteem.”
The distinction between power and status is important because

there is significant evidence that power and status are conferred sepa-
rately (Fast et al., 2012; Galinsky et al., 2015), that power and status
hierarchies function differently (Bendersky & Hays, 2012; Hays &
Bendersky, 2015), and that the experience of having power has fun-
damentally different psychological and behavioral consequences than
having status (e.g., Anicich et al., 2016; Blader & Chen, 2012; Fast
et al., 2012). This distinction is also important to dual-strategies theory,
as several researchers have linked dominance with power and prestige
with status (cf. Case et al., 2018; Maner & Case, 2016; Ronay, Maddux,
& von Hippel, 2018). Nevertheless, power and status frequently co-
occur (Blader & Chen, 2014). Unless specified, the term “social rank” is
agnostic to the type of hierarchy: a person with high social rank can
have power, status, or both.

Leadership

While definitions of leadership are plentiful (Northouse, 2018), one
consistently agreed upon theme is that leadership represents a complex,
multi-faceted group process by which an individual influences the
group toward their goals (Avolio, Walumbwa, & Weber, 2009; Bass &
Bass, 2008; Hogan & Kaiser, 2005; Kantner, 2010; Lord, Day, Zaccaro,
Avolio, & Eagly, 2017; Northouse, 2018). It is important to note that
leadership does not refer to a position of high social rank: an individual
with high social rank may be in a position to lead others, but that does
not necessarily mean he or she will do so (Blader & Chen, 2014).

Dual strategies (not leadership styles)
The dual-strategies theory of social rank focuses on the psycholo-

gical and behavioral strategies that individuals employ to attain and
maintain a position of high social rank, as well as the implications of
these strategies for the group. In this way, the theory focuses on ap-
proaches to hierarchy, and not necessarily the complex, multifaceted,
and reciprocal processes of leadership. For this reason, dominance and
prestige are not leadership styles, but rather reflect strategies by which
individuals attempt to gain and maintain positions of social rank. Some
might assume from the word “strategy” that these behaviors are in-
tentional, premediated, and/or Machiavellian, but this is not necessa-
rily the case: individuals might engage in either of these strategies
without even consciously considering their position within the hier-
archy.

Although dual-strategies theory is not a theory of leadership per se,
understanding how social hierarchies are formed, maintained, or dis-
rupted is an important component of understanding leadership in or-
ganizations. Thus, dual-strategies theory can be used in conjunction
with extant leadership theories to better explain leadership, follower-
ship, and hierarchies in modern organizations or social groups broadly.
(I explore the potential integration of dual-strategies theory and lea-
dership theory in more detail in the section entitled “Dual-strategies
theory and classic leadership theories.”) Additionally, many phe-
nomena investigated by leadership researchers (for example, leadership
emergence or how leaders and followers navigate compliance) are
squarely within the domain of dual-strategies theory. Because of this,
an integration of leadership research and dual-strategies theory is likely
to enrich both lines of research and prevent unnecessary duplication of
research efforts.

Finally, although “leadership” refers to a complex, multiparty pro-
cess, in the social psychological and anthropological research on hier-
archy, it is typical to use the word “leader” to mean a person with high
social rank. Throughout this paper, I use the term leader to this effect
(and do not intend to evoke or comment on the complexity of the
process of leadership when using this term).

K.J. McClanahan The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101315

2



Introduction to the dual-strategies theory of social rank

The dual-strategies theory of social rank is a theoretical perspective
on hierarchy based in evolutionary psychology and anthropology.1

Evolutionary psychology is a scientific line of inquiry that suggests that
human psychology is (at least in part) a reflection of our ancestral
history (Buss, 2005; Cosmides & Tooby, 1992). One key tenet of evo-
lutionary psychology is that a comprehensive understanding of human
psychology requires an investigation into the conditions and selection
pressures to which humans evolved: by understanding the social en-
vironments to which our brains adapted, we gain additional insights
into human psychology and behavior. An evolutionary approach to
hierarchy and leadership specifically means considering the selective
pressures and adaptive problems solved by groups and leaders during
human evolution. Thus, insights into modern hierarchies can be gained
by considering the groups and hierarchies of the human Environment of
Evolutionary Adaptedness, or EEA.

The human EEA refers to the conditions to which we are humans
evolved. While it is impossible to pinpoint a singular environment or
time period that could reflect the complexity of human evolution, the
EEA represents the “composite of environment properties” (Tooby &
Cosmides, 1990, p. 388) that were present when humans evolved to
their current form. It is hypothesized that most uniquely human traits
evolved during the Pleistocene era, which spanned from approximately
2.5 million years ago to approximately 12,000 years ago (Symons,
1992). During this time period, human social groups were quite dif-
ferent from our modern context—they tended to be small, kin-based,
and relatively egalitarian (van Vugt, Hogan, & Kaiser, 2008). Hierarchy
tended to be informal, domain-specific, and marked by constant shifts
(Henrich & Gil-White, 2001; van Vugt et al., 2008). An investigation
into these groups, as well as human selection pressures and ancestral
environments that evoked them, provides a variety of fascinating
questions and potential insights for leadership research (see Garfield,
von Rueden, & Hagen, 2019 or van Vugt et al., 2008 for reviews).

The dual-strategies theory of social rank, however, focuses on one
interesting dichotomy that has been noted by the ethologists, biologists,
and evolutionary anthropologists who study these groups. Specifically,
they noted that, “leaders sometimes engage in dominant behaviors that
often benefit themselves at the expense of the group, and sometimes
provide information- and skill-based services that benefit both them-
selves and the group” (Garfield et al., 2019, p. 74). Dual-strategies
theory suggests that this dichotomy between the use of force at the
expense of the group (termed a dominant strategy) and the use of
knowledge and skill to benefit the group (termed a prestige strategy) is
at the core to understanding how individuals attain and maintain po-
sitions of influence in social groups.

Dominance

Hierarchies characterized by dominance typically feature in-
dividuals who try to force and manipulate their way to positions at the
top of the hierarchy (not unlike the hierarchies of most great apes;
Maner, 2017; Tiger & Fox, 1972). The dominance approach is

characterized by intimidation, coercion, and manipulation of group
resources. Dominant individuals are primarily interested in acquiring
and retaining positions of power (vs. status; Maner & Case, 2016), and
often prioritize this interest above the interests of the group (Maner &
Mead, 2010). Additionally, dominant leaders' preoccupation with their
own standing within the group means they tend to be hyper-vigilant to
other group members who might pose a threat to their aspirations of
power (Case & Maner, 2014; Maner & Case, 2016). Dominant leaders
are also more likely to subjugate their group members in order to in-
crease the power differential between them and their followers. In other
words, dominance is a hierarchy-enhancing strategy (Maner & Case,
2016).

Why might individuals allow a dominant individual to lead the
group despite his/her selfish behavior? Scholars have identified at least
four reasons why dominance hierarchies might emerge. First, a dom-
inance hierarchy can prevent constant conflict over resources: a widely
known and accepted pecking order provides clear rules and expecta-
tions for how resources will be distributed among group members
(Drews, 1993). This can prevent constant in-fighting every time group
resources need to be distributed. While being at the bottom of a dom-
inance hierarchy may bear some cost, it can provide benefits to the
group as a whole by preventing chaos.

Second, dominance can provide increased coordination among
group members, making dominance particularly valuable in situations
in which a high degree of coordination is necessary for the group to
survive or flourish—one such context being times of intergroup conflict
(King, Johnson, & van Vugt, 2009). Indeed, during times of intergroup
conflict, dominant leaders subjugate their own interests for the good of
the group (Fortunato & Gavrilets, 2014; Maner & Mead, 2010) and
aggressively defend the group's welfare (Laustsen & Petersen, 2017). In
these ways (or in these contexts), dominant leaders can provide im-
portant benefits to the group (Garfield et al., 2019).

Third, another function that leaders serve is keeping group members
in line and punishing free-riders (those who fail to complete their duty
to the group; De Cremer & van Vugt, 2002). That is, a leader is re-
sponsible for punishing potentially exploitative group members
(Lukaszewski, Simmons, Anderson, & Roney, 2016), discouraging de-
fection (von Rueden, 2014), and arbitrating conflict between group
members (von Rueden & Gurven, 2012). Group members may see
dominant leaders' willingness to use force as an asset in this regard:
they may be seen as more capable of protecting the group from those
who would undermine or exploit group cooperation.

A final explanation for the emergence of dominant leader is more
pessimistic about the benefits of dominant leaders, but rather suggests
that dominant leader is more likely to attain and retain a position of
high social rank when group members have limited outside alternatives
to the dominant leader (Hirschman, 1970; Price & van Vugt, 2014).
That is, dominant leadership might flourish when group members are
highly dependent on their leader, do not have good outside alternatives,
or lack the ability to revolt (Ronay, Oostrom, & Maner, under review).
In these contexts, the leader may have more leeway to engage in
coercive, selfish behavior (Price & van Vugt, 2014) that would typically
cause group members to reject the leader (Boehm, 1993).

Prestige

In contrast to force-based dominance hierarchies, hierarchies can
also be based on prestige—in our ancestral past, talented hunters or
other skilled group members were deferred to because of their valued
experience, skills, and ability to mentor and help others (Henrich & Gil-
White, 2001). Thus, a prestige-based strategy typically involves at-
taining social rank by amassing the respect, admiration, and “freely
conferred deference” of one's subordinates rather than through active
subjugation of others (Henrich & Gil-White, 2001, p. 165). Prestige-
oriented individuals tend to demonstrate competence and expertise,
which other group members value and admire (Anderson & Kilduff,

1 While dual-strategies theory has been championed by evolutionary psy-
chologists in the last decade, it is important to note that this work has drawn
heavily on the work of anthropologists, biologists, primatologists, and etholo-
gists more broadly. Indeed, researchers in these areas had been discussing the
evolutionary origins of human hierarchies for decades prior to the adoption of
these ideas by evolutionary social psychologists. Anthropological research
specifically spoke of dominance hierarchies in humans (Tiger & Fox, 1972),
prestige as a form of hierarchy (Barkow, 1989) and/or a distinction between
force-based and persuasion-based attempts at social rank (Kracke, 1978). Given
this, the work on dual-strategies theory lead by evolutionary psychologists does
not necessarily represent an innovative new idea, but rather a conciliation and
advancement of ideas from several different intellectual domains.

K.J. McClanahan The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101315

3



2009). Importantly, however, demonstrating competence alone is
generally not enough to elicit respect and deference—group members
must also feel confident that the potential leader will use his or her
skills to benefit the group (Anderson et al., 2015; Hardy & van Vugt,
2006). Thus, a prestige strategy is thought to involve demonstration of
expertise and magnanimity, so that other group members willingly
defer to the potential leader (Maner, 2017; Maner & Case, 2016; Willer,
2009). While dominant leaders tend to assert themselves and their will
on other group members, prestige oriented leaders tend to display both
prosocial behavior and knowledge and expertise in specific topic areas,
increasing their trustworthiness and value in the eyes of others (Chudek
& Henrich, 2011; Maner & Case, 2016). One other reason that followers
might defer to prestige-oriented leaders is that prestige-based leaders
tend to be relatively egalitarian (Henrich & Gil-White, 2001), which is
thought to be preferable for most followers (Harms, Wood, Landay,
Lester, & Lester, 2017; van Vugt et al., 2008).

Patterns of prestige-based deference generally benefitted both the
leader and follower (Price & van Vugt, 2014). Followers were able to
learn valuable information from successful individuals and also bene-
fited from having a competent leader make group decisions (Hagen &
Garfield, 2019). In turn, followers tended to offer deference and pres-
tige to these successful individuals. Although a prestige-based strategy
often required the leader to sacrifice for the good of the group (Price &
van Vugt, 2014; Willer, 2009), the leader was generally repaid with
high social rank, which translated into an increased ability to attain
personal goals, control resources, and influence others (Maner & Case,
2016).

Although some scholars debate the precise mechanism by which
dominance and prestige strategies were transmitted from generation to
generation (be it psychological adaptation, cultural group selection, or
a combination of both; see Chudek & Henrich, 2011; Maner, 2017;
Richerson et al., 2016; Richerson & Henrich, 2012), there is abundant
evidence that both strategies exists across a variety of contexts and
cultures (Garfield et al., 2019; Kracke, 1978)2 which is typically con-
sidered to be a major calling card of evolved human adaptations
(Schmitt & Pilcher, 2004). Furthermore, it is clear that (at least in some
contexts) both of these strategies provided benefits to both leaders and
followers. Evolutionary psychologists suggest that when social inter-
actions provide a net fitness benefit to the individuals within a group
(in this case, both leaders and followers), these patterns of interaction
are likely to persist and evolve (Tooby & Cosmides, 1992). At a high
level, this explains how dominance and prestige-based hierarchies came
to be widespread.

In short, the dual-strategies theory of social rank suggests that due
to the pervasiveness of dominance and prestige in our evolutionary

past, the proclivity toward these strategies is still inherent in our psy-
chology. Consequently, the dual-strategies theory of social rank sug-
gests that even today, attempts to both attain and maintain positions of
high social rank can be categorized into one of two distinct strategies:
dominance or prestige (Cheng & Tracy, 2014; Henrich & Gil-White,
2001; Maner, 2017; Maner & Case, 2016). Furthermore, while dom-
inance and prestige are very different approaches to gaining and
maintaining high social rank, dual-strategies theory suggests that both
strategies are effective ways of attaining social rank, representing “two
ways to the top” (Cheng et al., 2013).3

Dominance and prestige as individual tendencies

Dual-strategies theory suggests that while dominance and prestige
are strategies for obtaining social rank, they can also reflect individual
differences between individuals (Maner & Case, 2016). That is, while it
would be feasible for a person to enact a dominant strategy at one time
and a prestige-based strategy at another time, it is hypothesized that
people tend to gravitate toward one strategy over the other. In this way,
the terms “dominant” and “prestige-oriented” can also be applied to a
person who consistently deploys one of the strategies.

Research on dominance and prestige from an evolutionary psy-
chology perspective suggests that this individual difference can also be
conceptualized as a difference in motives in addition to a difference in
behavior (Maner & Case, 2016). Specifically, Maner and Case (2016)
suggest that dominance is a reflection of the motivation for power, and
prestige-orientation reflects a motivation for status.4 This difference in
motivation could explain a key difference in the psychology of dom-
inance- and prestige-oriented individuals. Status is inherently other-
focused—gaining status necessitates that you consider the needs of
others, as you depend on them to give you status (Anderson et al.,
2015). In contrast, power is something that can be taken—other group
members can be managed or manipulated in pursuit of resources or
control (Barkow, 1989). Given this, it follows that dominant leaders
would be inherently less focused on how others view them.

2 One common and related debate in the study of human evolution is whether
a given characteristic is uniquely human. There is a myriad of evidence that
dominance hierarchies predate humans and are found across a myriad of spe-
cies and genera, so there is no doubt that dominance is not uniquely human.
Researchers have debated whether prestige hierarchies are uniquely human.
While this question does not significantly impact the application of dual-stra-
tegies theory to modern organizations, it may be of interest to note that some
researchers argue that prestige-based hierarchies are present in non-human
primates, because chimpanzees demonstrate social learning from higher
ranking chimpanzees (Horner, Proctor, Bonnie, Whiten, & de Waal, 2010;
Kendal et al., 2015). Indeed, many species rely on more informed group
members to make decisions for the group, including elephants (Payne, 2003),
whales (Brent et al., 2015), and birds (Flack et al., 2018). However, other re-
searchers argue that prestige hierarchies in humans are distinct from the
knowledge-based hierarchies of non-human animals. This argument is relies on
the notion that a) prestige-based social learning in humans is far more complex
than the basic info-copying seen in other mammals (Henrich & Gil-White, 2001)
and b) prestige includes the learning of norms and culture passed down through
generations (with culture transmission considered by many to be a uniquely
human trait; Henrich et al., 2015), that prestige hierarchies in humans are
distinct from the knowledge-based hierarchies of non-human animals.

3 Yet another debate in this area revolves around how distinct dominance and
prestige are. Despite early anthropological work noting the dichotomy of
strategies in obtaining positions of social rank (Kracke, 1978), other anthro-
pologists such as Sahlins (1963) did not differentiate between the strategies,
suggesting that social rank in small-scale societies was attained through a
combination of both of cunning aggression and prestige. Furthermore, Chapais
(2015) argues that all social rank is attained through competence, and that
dominance and prestige simply reflect competence in different domains. Cha-
pais also argues that because chimpanzee hierarchies include both forced-based
coercion and competence-based attraction to high-ranking individuals, the two
strategies may have more overlap in terms of evolutionary origins than pre-
viously thought. Despite these claims, there is considerable evidence that
dominance and prestige hierarchies result in distinct group processes (e.g.,
Garfield, Hubbard, & Hagen, 2019; Hays & Bendersky, 2015), and that domi-
nant and prestige-based leaders have distinct psychologies and behavior (see
Maner & Case, 2016 for a review). Despite this, it is worth noting that in at least
some samples, self-reported dominance and prestige motivations are positively
correlated (e.g., Case & Maner, 2014), though peer-reported prestige and
dominance strategies tend not to be (Cheng et al., 2013). See the section on
“Dominance and Prestige as Individual Tendencies” below for further discus-
sion on this distinction.

4 While motivation for power/status has been theorized to drive a tendency
toward a dominance or prestige influence strategy, other work from evolu-
tionary anthropology and evolutionary psychology points out that the strategy
an individual employs is likely a reflection of their inherent resources and
capabilities as well. (Lukaszewski et al., 2016; von Rueden, 2014, 2016). For
example, if an individual does not have the resources to use force or control
others, a dominant strategy is likely to be ineffective. If an individual does not
possess relevant or valued skills or knowledge, a prestige strategy is unlikely to
be effective (Brand & Mesoudi, 2019). Thus, in addition to underlying motives
for status vs. power, individuals likely employ strategies that are more likely to
be efficacious for them.

K.J. McClanahan The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101315

4



It should be noted, however, that the other-oriented focus of pres-
tige leaders could be, but is not necessarily, a sign of prosocial mo-
tives—it is possible that prestige-oriented leaders are preoccupied with
their own self-interest (gaining status), but are required to think about
others and act prosocially in order to obtain this status. Indeed, there is
much evidence that in many human contexts prosociality (or as least a
lack of self-interest) is rewarded with social status (Bai, Ching, Ho, &
Yan, 2019; Flynn, Reagans, Amanatullah, & Ames, 2006; Hardy & van
Vugt, 2006; Willer, 2009; Willer, Youngreen, Troyer, & Lovaglia, 2012).
Those who violate cooperative norms by displaying selfishness are
punished (Peterson, 1993), ostracized (Feinberg, Willer, & Schultz,
2014), or suffer damaged reputations after being the target of gossip
(Hess & Hagen, 2019; Wu, Balliet, & Van Lange, 2016). (This, of course,
assumes that group members have the resources to overthrow a selfish
leader; Woodburn, 2011.) Thus, prestige-focused individuals may
(correctly) assume that they must focus on the needs of others in order
to get what they want: status.

Consistent with this idea, there is some evidence that prestige-or-
iented leaders have a tendency to pander to the desires of other group
members. When faced with making a popular choice which is not ideal
for the group or an unpopular choice that would be good for the group,
prestige- (but not dominance-) oriented leaders are likely to make a
popular choice, even if it will negatively impact group performance
(Case et al., 2018). It is not clear if this pandering is a reflection of
prestige-oriented leaders' concerns about their own status or their de-
sire to maintain positive relationships with others, but this does suggest
that a) prosocial individuals care about what others think of them and
b) that they sometimes let their own motives take precedence over what
is best for the group (Case, Bae, & Maner, 2019). It is important to note
that while dominance and prestige may seem like incompatible stra-
tegies, self-reports on dominance and prestige motivations are often
positively correlated, though peer-ratings and objectively-coded mea-
sures of dominance and prestige tend not to be positively correlated in
(Cheng et al., 2013). This is somewhat unsurprising, given that ob-
servers often rely on inaccurate markers of prestige (Jiménez &
Mesoudi, 2019). However, it does indicate that while the same in-
dividual might be motivated by both dominance and prestige, others
perceive their behavioral strategies to follow just one of the two stra-
tegies (at least at a given time). Adding to the complexity, the style an
individual adopts (and how other group members respond to this style)
is likely to be driven by contextual factors, including intergroup conflict
(Laustsen & Petersen, 2015, 2017; Spisak, Blaker, Lefevre, Moore, &
Krebbers, 2014), resource inequality (Ronay et al., 2018), or economic
uncertainty (Kakkar & Sivanathan, 2017).

Dual-strategies theory and classic leadership theories

While research on leadership is vast, much of it has revolved around
common themes. How does a leader exact compliance from her sub-
ordinates? How important is a leader's socio-emotional intelligence?
How can a leader balance task and relational concerns? Many of these
questions are also at the heart of the dual-strategies theory of social
rank. For this reason, it is important to consider the dual-strategies
theory of social rank within the context of the leadership research.
However, to this point, there have not been any systematic attempts to
integrate the two bodies of research. Below, I conduct the first review of
dual-strategies theory in the context of major theories about leadership
with the aim of further elucidating what exactly dual-strategies theory
is and how it differs from leadership research and theory. Defining the
theory in terms of what it is not will hopefully shed more light on what
precisely it adds to the literature.

I specifically examine how the dual-strategies theory relates to the
following five leadership frameworks: a) Blake and Mouton's manage-
rial grid, b) Leader-Member Exchange, c) transformational versus
transactional leadership, d) servant leadership, and e) authoritarianism
versus democratic leadership. While these five frameworks certainly do

not represent the entirety of relevant leadership theory, they were se-
lected because they represent some of the most prominent and studied
theories in the leadership literature (Bass & Bass, 2008) and/or because
of their thematic similarity to dominance or prestige. I briefly describe
each of these theories, and then note some key ways in which they are
similar to or different from dual-strategies theory. It should be noted
that this review is intentionally brief—while it is possible to write at
length about how the dual-strategies theory of social rank relates to
each of these theories, I refrain from such an extensive comparison, as
the goal is to provide a high-level picture of how dual-strategies theory
of social rank relates to the field of leadership as a whole (rather than
provide extensive integration with any specific theories).

Blake and Mouton's managerial grid

In one of the landmark theories of leadership, Blake and Mouton
(1964) conceptualized leadership styles in terms of a managerial grid.
This grid classified leaders on two dimensions—their concern for the
people they lead (relational orientation) and their concern for com-
pleting group goals (task orientation). Blake and Mouton specified that
these concepts were orthogonal, and leaders could be high on one, both,
or neither dimension. Thus, the managerial grid provides a convenient
way of classifying leadership approaches.

Dual-strategies theory bears some important similarity to the work
of Blake and Mouton. One reasonable integration of these theories is
that relational orientation is one distinction between dominance and
prestige-oriented strategies. That is, dominant individuals tend to de-
monstrate relatively low concern for others as they tend to be more
preoccupied with their own desire to maintain or retain power (Case &
Maner, 2014; Maner & Case, 2016; Maner & Mead, 2010). In contrast,
prestige-based individuals tend to be more concerned about their re-
lationships with group members than are dominant individuals (Case
et al., 2018; Case & Maner, 2014; (Case, Bae, & Maner, 2018, 2019;
Maner, 2017)). In fact, this is one of the key distinctions between the
strategies.

The link between dominance/prestige and task orientation is less
clear. Dominant individuals might be considered high on task orienta-
tion because they are more concerned with pushing their own agenda
rather than being diplomatic (van Vugt et al., 2008) or because they
may be seen as willing to punish those who do not pull their weight on
accomplishing group goals (Lukaszewski et al., 2016; von Rueden,
2014). However, it is not clear if this agentic tendency translates to a
focus on accomplishing broader group goals. There is some limited
(unpublished) evidence that dominant leaders are, on average, more
effective at coordinating tasks than prestige-oriented leaders, leading to
better group performance when there is a need for a high degree of
coordination (Cheng, Tracy, & Henrich, in prep). This out-performance
might be a reflection of dominant leaders' focus on the completion of
group tasks, but the mechanism and motives for augmented perfor-
mance is mere speculation at this point. Additionally, tyrannical and
authoritarian leadership (which share some similarity with dominance)
have repeatedly been conceptually linked to a task orientation
(Einarsen, Aasland, & Skogstad, 2007; Harms et al., 2017; Tepper,
2000), but empirical evidence confirming this does not appear to exist.

It is also not clear if prestige-orientated leaders are high on task
orientation. Given that demonstrating competence is a hallmark of the
prestige strategy, it follows that prestige-oriented leaders would need to
focus on task performance in order for their strategy to be effective.
Indeed, there is evidence that prestige-oriented leaders tend to work
harder toward group goals than their dominance-oriented counterparts
(Case et al., 2018). However, it is not clear if this is a reflection of their
task orientation, or their desire to help or please their group members
(reflecting a relational motivation).

In short, themes of Blake and Mouton's managerial grid can be seen
in dual-strategies theory. In particular, the ‘concern for others’ dimen-
sion provides a great illustration of some of the differences between

K.J. McClanahan The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101315

5



dominance and prestige as strategies. On the other hand, it is less clear
how dominance and prestige might interact with task orientation,
which may provide an interesting avenue for future research.

Leader-member exchange

Leader member exchange theorizing (Graen, 1976; LMX) suggests
that leaders and their individual followers interact in patterns of ex-
change that both incur costs (e.g., use resources) and create value. LMX
has shifted focus since its conception and early work (Schriesheim,
Castro, & Cogliser, 1999). In its early days, the theory revolved around
the idea that the leader-follower relationship will be formed and
maintained if the benefits for both the leader and the follower outweigh
the costs (Bass & Bass, 2008, Graen, 1976, Sparrowe, 2018). Interest-
ingly, this cost-benefit analysis is very much in line with evolutionary
perspectives on how humans determine whether a relationship is ben-
eficial (Sparrowe, 2018). However, in more recent research, LMX the-
orizing is generally used to evoke the idea that leaders enact different
leader-follower relationships with each of their followers, and that
these relationships vary in quality (Gerstner & Day, 1997; Henderson,
Liden, Glibkowski, & Chaudhry, 2009; Martin, Guillaume, Thomas, Lee,
& Epitropaki, 2016). For example, a leader might have a higher quality
relationship with one of her five followers such that the quality of the
relationship is significantly different than the leader's relationship with
the other followers. This differential relationship quality among dif-
ferent leader-follower dyads is at the heart of current LMX research.
The degree to which the leader-follower relationship quality varies
from follower to follower (as opposed to being rather uniform across
followers) is known as differentiation (Henderson et al., 2009).

LMX differs from the dual-strategies theory in that it does not focus
on the effectiveness of a leader's strategies per se, but rather focuses on
whether the leader-follow relationship is beneficial (or not) for the
leader and follower and whether the relationship quality varies from
individual to individual. This different focus means that these theories
can be used in conjunction to generate new potentially interesting re-
search questions and a more complete picture of hierarchy and lea-
dership. For example, what might a follower see as the costs and ben-
efits of having a dominant versus prestige-oriented leader? What types
of follower characteristics predict high-quality relationships with a
dominant or prestige-oriented leader? Are dominant or prestige-or-
iented leaders more likely to have high differentiation? In other words,
dual-strategies theory suggests that our evolved psychology is in-
herently attuned to leader and follower capacity in terms of both
dominance and prestige. Empirically investigating how these strategies
are factored into LMX processes and relationships is likely to be an
interesting and generative line of work.

Additionally, LMX and dual-strategies theory share an important
similarity: both theories have an explanation for leadership emergence
in addition to be relevant to in established hierarchies. (This stands in
contrast to the majority of leadership theory and research, which has
focused on the effectiveness or consequences of leader traits/behavior
after the hierarchy has already been established; Bass & Bass, 2008.)
Early work on LMX provides a theoretical explanation for leadership
emergence: it suggests that a leader emerges when such an arrangement
will provide more benefits to both the group and to the leader (Graen,
1976). While the subsequent empirical research on LMX has largely
examined exchange in established, formalized leadership contexts and
thus has lacked integration with research on leadership emergence
(Zhang, Waldman, & Wang, 2012), leadership acquisition was a core
focus of seminal work on this theory and thus represents a key simi-
larity to dual-strategies theory.

Transformational (versus transactional) leadership

A large body of leadership research has suggested that while many
leaders adhere to a transaction-focused type of leadership style, some

particularly inspired leaders move beyond this to a transformational
leadership style. While a transactional leadership style is characterized
by leaders attempting to maintain or increase efficiency within an ex-
isting set of processes, a transformational leader inspires and motivates
followers through an improved or entirely new process (Bass, 1999;
Burns, 1978). Thus, a transformational leader focuses on change
(DeRue, Nahrgang, Wellman, & Humphrey, 2011)—they shift the cur-
rent processes and relationship into something better or more fulfilling
for their employees, whereas a transactional leader's focus is on en-
suring that employees are fulfilling their roles. A transformational
leadership style has consistently been associated with gains in group
performance (Wang, Oh, Courtright, & Colbert, 2011).

While a focus on enacting change is not specifically addressed in
dual-strategies theory, one could theorize how dominance or prestige
strategies might be associated with transformational leadership. There
are several reasons to think that dominant leaders would not be inter-
ested in exercising transformational leadership. First, transformational
leadership is other-focused and generally prosocial in nature (Bass,
1999). This is the antithesis of dominant leaders, who are more likely to
view their subordinates as potential threats to their position and
therefore often act in ways that actually diminish their group members'
ability to grow (Case & Maner, 2014; Maner & Mead, 2010). Concerned
with keeping their own position of power, dominant leaders are more
likely to try to maintain the power differential between themselves and
their group—inspiring and transforming their subordinates goes against
this goal. However, it should be noted that this does not necessarily
mean that dominant leaders are precluded from engaging in the “large-
scale change” aspect of transformational leadership—while the proso-
cial elements of transformational leadership are unlikely to be posi-
tively linked with dominance, changing processes or systems is not
necessarily outside the purview of dominant leadership.

There are a few reasons to think that prestige‑leaders might be likely
to exercise transformational leadership. First, prestige-oriented leaders
tend to be more other-focused than dominant leaders (Case & Maner,
2014; Maner & Case, 2016), fitting with transformational leader's pro-
social aims. Second, prestige-oriented leaders are thought to be inter-
ested in the respect and admiration of their followers, and they might
see transformational leadership as a way to gain that respect and es-
teem: improving group processes might be one way to effectively de-
monstrate competence and selflessness, both characteristics that are
likely to evoke admiration (Bai et al., 2019; Bendersky & Pai, 2018;
Willer, 2009). This is particularly likely to be the case given that
transformation leadership is more difficult to enact than transactional
leadership styles (Bass, 1999). Successfully implementing a difficult
change would very likely garner more respect and status in the eyes of
others.

At the same time, some have theorized that part of the draw of
prestige-oriented leaders is that their leadership style is generally not
seen as commandeering or demanding, decreasing the likelihood that
prestige-oriented leaders are seen as power-hungry upstarts (Maner &
Case, 2016). Thus, a prestige-oriented leader might avoid making major
changes to group processes as these changes might be seen as imposing
their will on the group, offending egalitarian tendencies (Maner & Case,
2016). Prestige-oriented leaders may also struggle making changes if
they are concerned that such changes will upset other group members
(Case et al., 2018). Thus, the question of whether prestige would be
correlated with transformational leadership remains unclear. What is
clear at this point is that the constructs can, in principle, be orthogo-
nal—it is easy to imagine a prestige-oriented leader who engaged in
transformational leadership and one who did not.

The integration of these theories provides for new possible research
avenues. For example, does transformational leadership increase per-
ceptions of a leader's prestige (or dominance)? It may also be worth-
while to examine the motives of transformational leaders from a dual-
strategies perspective—do leaders exercise this type of leadership solely
out of prosocial motives? Or is transformational leadership a reflection

K.J. McClanahan The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101315

6



of a prestige-like desire for the respect and admiration that this type of
leadership might garner? Interesting questions also revolve around
dominance and transformational leadership. For example, while
transformational leadership refers to change orientation, this change is
usually assumed to be prosocial. Yet there is some evidence that
dominant leaders might be willing to implement changes to the group
processes in ways that advantage themselves (relative to their group
members). Could this change-orientation be viewed as a type of anti-
social transformational leadership? Further exploration of this trans-
formational vs. transactional leadership through the lens of dual stra-
tegies theory would likely be enlightening for both literatures. Finally,
another opportunity for integration of these theories revolves around
whether leaders change from transactional leadership to transforma-
tional leadership (or vice versa) over time or depending on the contexts.
If such changes occur, perhaps dual-strategies theory could explain
when and why a leader might employ one of these styles.

Servant leadership

Servant leadership is a leadership style in which leaders “combine
their motivation to lead with a need to serve” (van Dierendonck, 2011,
p. 1228). Servant leaders are thought to focus less on the benefits of
their position, but instead on benefitting their group members
(Greenleaf, 2004). As such, servant leaders are characterized by hu-
mility, empathy, and stewardship (Avolio et al., 2009) and the needs of
followers are more likely to be at the forefront of their mind (Stone,
Russell, & Patterson, 2004). Although the concept of servant leadership
was introduced by Greenleaf in 1977, serious empirical study of servant
leadership has just commenced recently (van Dierendonck, 2011).

Even the most cursory of comparisons between dominance and
servant leadership would likely elicit the conclusion that dominant
leaders are not likely to enact servant leadership—in general, dom-
inance leaders are more likely to focus on their own gain rather than
how they can serve their group. A prestige-based strategy, on the other
hand, bears significant resemblance to the concept of servant leader-
ship. Like servant leaders, prestige-based leaders are more likely to
make significant sacrifices for the welfare of their groups and work hard
to benefit other group members (Case et al., 2018; Price & van Vugt,
2014).

However, the theorizing on prestige diverges from theorizing on
servant leadership in at least two key ways. First, servant leadership
does not speak to competence, and demonstrating competence is likely
to be one of the key ways in which prestige-oriented leaders gain status
in social groups (Cheng & Tracy, 2014; Henrich, Chudek, & Boyd, 2015;
Henrich & Gil-White, 2001). Second, the motivation proscribed for self-
sacrifice is differs between these theories. Servant leadership theories
suggest that servant leaderships sacrifice for their group members due
to compassionate love (van Dierendonck & Patterson, 2015) and a focus
on their followers (Stone et al., 2004). Servant leaders are attributed
truly selfless motives: ‘the needs of others…[are their]…highest
priority” (Bass, 2000, p. 33). While prestige leaders are thought to be
focused on the needs of their group members, the reason for this may
ultimately be self-interested. Prestige leaders may make personal sa-
crifices for the group, but in return, they typically receive status
(Halevy, Chou, & Livingston, 2012; Price & van Vugt, 2014; Willer,
2009). Status is inherently valuable as it brings them preferential
treatment, increased influence, and a heightened ability to accomplish
their goals (Price & van Vugt, 2014). In this way, the sacrificial nature
of prestige-based leaders may be (at least in part) designed for their
own benefit (i.e., garnering respect for themselves) rather than for truly
selfless reasons. Supporting the idea that differing motives may be at
play, servant leadership is negatively correlated with narcissism
(Galvin, Lange, & Peterson, 2012), while prestige leadership is actually
positively correlated with narcissism (though prestige leaders likely
actively work to suppress this narcissism to retain the esteem of their
followers; Cheng, Tracy, & Henrich, 2010).

This offers opportunities for empirical investigation. The first re-
volves around whether servant leadership actually reflects true al-
truism, or whether servant leadership is often prestige leadership in
disguise—i.e., leaders reporting selfless motives because they know that
doing so will grant them respect and admiration. Another avenue re-
volves around group members' abilities to distinguish between these
two types of leadership. If truly altruistic servant leaders do exist, can
group members differentiate between self-sacrificing leaders who are
truly interested in the development of group members and those who
are sacrificing to garner personal benefit or prestige? The ability to
differentiate between these motives could be an important ability for
followers, but at this point it is unclear whether people have the ca-
pacity to differentiate (or whether this capacity varies from individual
to individual).

Authoritarianism versus democratic leadership

The degree to which leaders use force to induce compliance from
their followers has long been a theme of leadership research (Bass &
Bass, 2008). Specifically, authoritarian (or autocratic) leaders—who
use strength and force to ensure the group accomplishes their goal-
s—are often contrasted with democratic leaders who distribute the
power to make decisions among group members and include other
group members in their responsibilities(Harms et al., 2017). (This dis-
tinction is also referred to as directive versus participative leadership,
with directive leaders commanding their subordinates and participative
leaders inviting subordinates to participate in the decision-making
process; Bass & Bass, 2008). Although authoritarianism has been ne-
glected by the research in recent decades, recent political events have
provoked a renewed interest in the topic (Harms et al., 2017).

Authoritarianism, with its emphasis on coercion and control, maps
well onto the concept of dominance. However, although many scholars
treat dominance as synonymous with having an orientation toward
power (or the desire for power; Bass & Bass, 2008), it is not clear
whether this “desire for power” is truly a motivation for power (i.e.,
control over valued resources) or whether it is a motivation for a po-
sition of high social rank more broadly. This distinction is important
from the perspective of dual-strategies theory because the theory sug-
gests that prestige-oriented leaders might be just as motivated as
dominant individuals are for a position of social rank, but they may
focus more on status hierarchies (whereas dominant individuals may be
more focused on power; Maner & Case, 2016). Thus, it is unclear how
prestige-oriented leaders who strongly desire high status might fit into
this framework.

While prestige-oriented leaders tend to be more democratic in their
leadership style (Maner, 2017; Maner & Case, 2016), a prestige strategy
is not synonymous with democratic leadership. For one, competence is
an important facet of a prestige-based approach, but it is not a key
factor in the democratic leadership style. Furthermore, democratic
leadership tends to be a description of how a leader behaves or a group
interacts, whereas prestige provides an additional element: the leader's
motivation when engaging in power sharing (the personal desire for
status). Finally, democratic leadership generally refers to a leadership
style employed after being put into a position of high social rank (rather
than a strategy for attaining or maintaining social rank).

The unique focus of dual-strategies theory

Although the dual-strategies theory of social rank touches on many
of the same themes of leadership research (as detailed above), its
evolutionary origins and focus on social rank give it a unique focus
relative to most leadership research. Dual-strategies theory is unique in
that it was devised by thinking about small, cohesive, constantly
shifting groups that humans populated during the time of our evolu-
tionary history (Boehm, 1999; van Vugt et al., 2008), as opposed to the
typical formal organizational context where many leadership theories

K.J. McClanahan The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101315

7



of the 20th and 21st century were conceived (von Rueden & van Vugt,
2015). This evolutionary background alone does not provide sufficient
justification for the use of the theory. However, I argue that focusing on
these small, informal hierarchies has given dual-strategies theory a
unique and much needed perspective on leadership that would benefit
the larger body of research on leadership. This new perspective is not
intended to replace other leadership theories, but rather can add to
their contribution to our understanding of leaders and followers in
organizations. Below, I outline a few ways in which dual-strategies
theory of social rank represents a departure from most research on
leadership and describe why its unique foci make it particularly well-
equipped to explain today's modern organizations and workforce.
Specifically, I highlight how dual-strategies theory's emphasis on
shifting power dynamics, its focus on informal hierarchies, and the
introduction of prestige as a counterpoint to dominance is relevant to
today's economy (yet are underrepresented in major leadership theory).

Emphasis on acquiring social rank and shifts in power

Much of the organizational behavior research on leadership focuses
on a leader-follower relationship that is already in place. While research
on leadership emergence is certainly still present (see Acton, Foti, Lord,
& Gladfelter, 2019; Ensari, Riggio, Christian, & Carslaw, 2011; and
Lakey et al., 2002 for reviews), it is somewhat removed from work
examining formal leadership (Zhang et al., 2012; see Dinh et al., 2014
as a noteable excpetion). Furthermore, the research on leadership
emergence has largely lacked theoretical underpinnings (again, Acton
et al., 2019 and Wellman, 2017 represent notable exceptions), while
leadership theory has primarily focused situations in which the leader
has already attained their position of leadership (Bass & Bass, 2008).

Similarly, the majority of research in the field of organizational
behavior on leadership assumes hierarchies to be rather static. The
focus is on how leaders and followers each enact their roles, but there is
not a lot of emphasis on how these roles might change or how the
power dynamics might shift within a group. In short, most of the work
on leadership acknowledges the power asymmetry between leader and
follower, but beyond this, ignores any power dynamics in work groups
and organizations.

In contrast, dual-strategies research has investigated both the ac-
quisition of social rank and leadership behaviors in established hier-
archies (e.g., Case & Maner, 2014; Cheng et al., 2013; Maner & Mead,
2010), and the theory itself provides a conceptual framework to explain
both phenomena. It also focuses on how instabilities within the hier-
archy can impact a leader's goals (Case & Maner, 2014). Integrating
dual-strategies theory into leadership research might help reinvigorate
an interest in the leadership emergence in more traditional leadership
theory and provide a way of bringing the two bodies of literature to-
gether. Furthermore, dual-strategies theory assumes a world in which
no leadership position is immutable and hierarchies are constantly
changing, so the emphasis is on how people take advantage of or pro-
tect against power shifts.

This focus on shifting hierarchies and the acquisition of social rank
is important given demographic trends in employment. Specifically,
younger employees are far less likely to stay with the same company for
their entire career than workers just a generation ago (Bureau of Labor
Statistics, 2018). This means that in the future, the workforce is likely
to be increasingly composed of employees who move from organization
to organization more frequently than in the past (Harris, 2014). This
increased mobility means that people are regularly entering and navi-
gating new work groups and hierarchies, making the acquisition of
social rank a crucially important factor in organizations. Furthermore,
the decreased tenure of employees inherently makes hierarchies less
stable—as employees leave, hierarchies need to be restructured to fill
these gaps or accommodate external hires.

Beyond employees choosing to move organizations more frequently,
there is more of a demand for temporary workers: short-term and

contract work is representing an increasing proportion of work in the
United States (Horowitz, 2015). In this so-called “gig economy”
(Ashford, Caza, & Reid, 2018; Petriglieri, Ashford, & Wrzesniewski,
2018a), the constant flow of workers in and out of organizations (or
with varied clients) is likely to contribute to constantly changing
hierarchies.

Thus, the typical organizational hierarchies are likely less stable
than they were when many of the classic leadership theories emerged,
and theory that is able to explain and predict these power and status
changes will be a boon to leadership researchers. Furthermore, this
focus on how hierarchies develop and change over time answers calls to
make leadership research more focused on process and changing dy-
namics (Acton, Foti, Lord, & Gladfelter, 2018; Avolio et al., 2009;
Bendersky & Pai, 2018; Castillo & Trinh, 2018).

Emphasis on informal hierarchy

With the exception of the work on leadership emergence, the vast
majority of the research on leadership in organizational behavior ex-
amines formal hierarchies (i.e., formal supervisors in an organization).
There is certainly an acknowledgement that one does not need to have
formal leadership position to demonstrate leadership, but most of the
empirical work has focused on the formal organizational context
(Northouse, 2018).

In contrast, in the small groups of our evolutionary past, there was
no such thing as formal hierarchy dictated by a larger organization.
Indeed, the vast majority of human history likely took place in rela-
tively egalitarian contexts that lacked formal hierarchy (Kelly, 2007).
For this reason, there remains in dual-strategies theory an emphasis on
informal hierarchies (despite the fact that dominance and prestige are
tactics that could be employed by both formal managers and informal
leaders). While formal hierarchies still play a huge role in today's or-
ganizations, there are a few reasons to believe that informal hierarchies
are increasingly of particular importance to organizations.

First, there is an increasing segment of the population that is opting
out of employment in a traditional organization in favor of freelance
work (an estimated 150 million workers in North America and Western
Europe, many of whom are top knowledge workers, have already made
this choice; Petriglieri, Ashford, & Wrzesniewski, 2018b). For these
workers, formal organizational hierarchy may not be particularly re-
levant—rather than worrying about their interactions with their boss or
their chances of getting promoted, they instead are focused on their
performance in the eyes of their clientele and the way that they stack up
relative to other freelance workers in their field. This employment
reality, faced by an increasing number of workers, would likely be
considered outside the wheelhouse of most traditional leadership the-
ories. However, dual-strategy theory's emphasis on informal hierarchies
makes it well-equipped to explain how leadership and hierarchy are
relevant for gig and freelance workers.

Second, there is some evidence that egalitarianism is increasingly
promoted as a management strategy (Levering, 2016; Marschan, Welch,
& Welch, 1996): self-managing teams are increasingly common
(Kirkman, 2001); knowledge work—which is inherently less suited to
authority and hierarchy (Adler, 1999)—is representing an increasingly
proportion of work (Karoly & Panis, 2004); and the majority of firms
now use agile project management, which emphasizes collaborative
workflows in which egalitarianism is valued (Project Management
Institute, 2017). While there is likely a great deal of variation in the
degree to which organizations actually adopt egalitarian ideals, de-
centralization of decision-making power appears to be increasingly
common even among large, multi-national corporations (Marschan
et al., 1996). Because humans appear to have natural tendencies toward
hierarchy of some kind (van Berkel, Crandall, Eidelman, & Blanchar,
2015), a decreasing reliance on formal hierarchies is likely result in
increasingly important status and informal hierarchies (Marschan et al.,
1996; Tiedens, Unzueta, & Young, 2007), a focus for dual-strategies

K.J. McClanahan The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101315

8



theory. Furthermore, if egalitarianism is widely valued, group members
are likely to punish “upstarts” who try to claim power through force
(Boehm, 1999). Understanding how potential leaders can obtain in-
fluence in such contexts is therefore key to understanding influence in
today's organizations. Dual-strategies theory articulates a strategy
(prestige) that fits these parameters.

Third, it is becoming more readily apparent that even organizations
with steep, formal hierarchies are shaped by the informal hierarchies of
their employees. For example, there is evidence that group performance
appears to be determined in part by the informal hierarchies among
group members (Bendersky & Hays, 2017; Joshi & Knight, 2014; Zhang
et al., 2012). Additionally, one's informal social landscape can impact
promotion in the formal organization hierarchy (Podolny & Baron,
1997). Thus, even in traditionally hierarchical firms, dual-strategy
theory's emphasis on informal hierarchies is worth considering.

Prestige as a counterpart to dominance

One of the major contributions of the dual-strategies theory of social
rank is the introduction of the prestige strategy as a counterpart to
dominance. As noted above, dominance—or similar variants such as
authoritarianism, autocratic, or directive leadership—have long been a
subject of leadership research. Many of these theories have described
alterative leadership strategies that do not use force or coercion (e.g.,
democratic leadership, servant leadership, transformational leader-
ship). However, prestige differs from these strategies in a few key ways.
First, as articulated earlier, demonstrating competence is a key element
to a prestige strategy. Second, a prestige-oriented strategy may not
inherently be prosocial: while prestige-oriented leaders act in extremely
prosocial ways, their own personal desire for status is thought to un-
derlie much of their group-oriented behavior. This represents a unique
combination of traits, strategies, and motives that has not been re-
flected in the leadership literature up to this point.

There are several reasons why investigating prestige makes sense in
the modern work context. First, with the dawn of the information age,
having unique, complicated skillsets and competencies is increasingly
important for employees (Stewart, 1998). In the past, when employees
were more likely to be in menial or non-technical jobs, seniority or
tenure were much larger factors in determining promotion (Rosenfeld,
2014). However, in today's knowledge economy (Adler, 1999), em-
ployee knowledge and skills are more important than ever, bringing
competence to the forefront of decisions as to who will attain positions
at the top of the hierarchy. Prestige's focus on demonstrating skills as a
basis for deference is particularly relevant in this employment climate.

Additionally, as mentioned above, organizations are increasingly
characterized by informal and shifting hierarchies. Interestingly, these
hierarchies often lead to more social-rank related conflicts (Hays &
Bendersky, 2015), and may make status a more valued commodity.
Because prestige is thought to reflect a desire for status, it may be a
particularly informative construct to investigate in this modern context.

How leadership research can enhance dual-strategies theory

Just as introducing the dual-strategies theory of social rank into the
broader leadership research can provide unique insights into the study
of leadership in organizations, insights from the rich body of leadership
theory and research can increase the viability and veracity of the dual-
strategies theory of social rank. Below, I describe three ways in which
leadership theory and research can (and should) be integrated into the
work dual-strategies theory in order to provide a more robust field of
inquiry. Specifically, I describe how an increased focused on the group,
the impact of contextual factors on the effectiveness of dominance and
prestige, and more consideration of organizational factors such as
formal hierarchy, diversity, and technology are important areas in
which to expand this are of research.

Stronger focus on the group

A central focus of leadership research has been the leader's impact
on the group. Indeed, leadership research continues to shift from a
focus on leadership traits to a process and group focus (Avolio et al.,
2009). Dual-strategies theory, on the other hand, has largely focused on
the psychology of the leader, with relatively few studies looking at the
experience of the group or the effectiveness of the group. It should be
noted that this reflects a disconnect between theory and actual re-
search—while dual-strategies theory has a heavy focus on the actual
group context, the empirical research on dual-strategies theory has
maintained a rather consistent focus on the individual employing the
strategy. For example, up to this point, “effectiveness” from a dual-
strategies perspective has referred to whether the leader is able to attain
a position of social rank, not whether the group is successful in ac-
complishing their goals (see, for example, Cheng et al., 2013). The ef-
fects of each of these strategies on group performance is likely to be one
of the primary questions with which organizations and practitioners are
concerned, so this certainly represents an important area for future
research.

There has also been very little research that considers the perspec-
tive of the followers, an area of research that is experiencing a revival in
organizational behavior research (Avolio et al., 2009; Bastardoz & van
Vugt, 2019; Robert G Lord et al., 2017; Van Vugt et al., 2008). The
extant literature suggests that other group members tend to dislike
dominant individuals (Cheng et al., 2013; Redhead, O'Gorman, Cheng,
Driver, & Foulsham, 2019), except in instances such as economic un-
certainty or intergroup conflict (Kakkar & Sivanathan, 2017; Laustsen &
Petersen, 2017; van Vugt & Grabo, 2015), but beyond this, dual-stra-
tegies theory cannot speak to how followers perceive dominant or
prestige-oriented leaders.

There is likely a high degree of individual variation in how a sub-
ordinate may respond to dominant or prestige-based leader. Research
from LMX suggests that leaders have distinct relationships with each of
their followers, and that the quality of the leader-follower relationship
is a function of both the leader and the follower (Gerstner & Day, 1997).
Yet, leader-follower fit has not been discussed in the work on dom-
inance and prestige, despite conjectures that follower traits are likely an
important factor in understanding how controlling leaders in particular
attain positions of influence (Harms et al., 2017).

Beyond follower's perceptions of or desire for dominant and pres-
tige-oriented leadership, it is also worth considering how fellow group
members influence whether an individual employs a dominance or
prestige-based strategy. Leadership theory suggests that the effective-
ness of a leadership style is impacted by the traits of the followers (Bass,
1960), and it is easy to imagine that leaders would shift their strategies
depending on the qualities and behavior of group members. A further
discussion of dominance and prestige as strategies that include input
from group members would be a boon to this area of research.

An investigation of context

Researchers as early as the 1940s have suggested that it is fruitless
to study the effectiveness of any given leadership strategy without in-
formation about context (Stogdill, 1948). That is, a leadership strategy
that might be wildly effective in a group of 14-year-old boys may not be
efficacious in a team of research scientists. Thus, it is widely accepted in
general leadership research that the effectiveness of leadership traits or
strategies are contingent on the situation (Anderson, Spataro, & Flynn,
2008; Bass, 1960; Bass & Bass, 2008; Hersey, 1985; Hersey, Blanchard,
& Natemeyer, 1979; Oc, 2018). However, to this point, dual-strategies
theory has paid little attention to how contextual factors impact dom-
inance and prestige as strategies. This represents a serious limitation to
this area of research and also a great opportunity for further work.

There has been some discussion of contextual factors that impact the
behavior of dominant or prestige-oriented leaders, including intergroup

K.J. McClanahan The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101315

9



competition, stability of the hierarchy, and the anonymity of decision
making (Case & Maner, 2014; Maner & Mead, 2010). However, research
on how contextual factors impact on the effectiveness of dominance and
prestige as strategies for attaining social rank and leading groups has
been minimal. Thus far, research has indicated that the viability of
dominance as a strategy increases with economic instability, group
status threat, and intergroup conflict (Fortunato & Gavrilets, 2014;
Kakkar & Sivanathan, 2017; Laustsen & Petersen, 2017; Van Vugt &
Grabo, 2015). There is also some evidence that dominance might be
more effective in short-term contexts (McClanahan, Cheng, Carswell, &
Craig, 2019; Redhead et al., 2019), in situations where it is challenging
for group members to revolt (Ronay et al., 2019), or in situations where
a leader is expected to punish free-riders (Lukaszewski et al., 2016; von
Rueden, 2014). There has been some theorizing that prestige might be a
better strategy for prompting creativity, while dominance might be
better effective for tasks requiring coordination (Maner, 2016), but this
lacks empirical evidence. Indeed, others argue that prestige-based lea-
ders might possess superior coordination abilities due to their increased
knowledge and presumed ability to intelligently solve complex tasks
(Hagen & Garfield, 2019). In short, our empirical understanding of how
the effectiveness of dominance and prestige varies from situation to
situation is extremely limited.

The lack of attention to context is a surprising oversight in dual-
strategies theory, as it is hard to imagine that the efficacy of these
strategies would not vary widely depending on the nature and purpose
of the group or the broader organization. For example, the effectiveness
of dominance or prestige is likely to be impacted by components of the
group task such as domain, degree of interdependence required, time
pressure, and performance pressure. Expectations of the leader's role
are also worth considering: is the leader's primary responsibility co-
ordinating tasks? Motivating subordinates? Mentoring them?
Advocating for the group? These distinct purposes are likely to impact
the type of leader desired. Finally, broader contextual factors such as
group size, the formality and complexity of the organizational struc-
ture, organizational culture, and even firm performance are likely to
impact who is promoted and which leaders are deemed successful, ul-
timately shaping whether a dominance or prestige strategy is effective.
In short, there are likely dozens of contextual factors that impact the
effectiveness of dominance and prestige (see Oc, 2018 for a compre-
hensive overview of important contextual factors in organizationals). A
serious examination of these factors is an important next step for the
application of dual-strategies theory to modern organizations.

More attention to modern organizational facets

While the focus on informal authority, small groups, and shifting
hierarchies is likely to shed important insights into modern organiza-
tions (as outlined above), there are some facets of modern organizations
that dual-strategies theory has not yet explicitly addressed. In parti-
cular, dual-strategies theory could provide a more complete portrait for
dominance and prestige in modern organizations with more explicit
consideration of factors such as a) formal hierarchy, b) demographic
diversity, and c) technology.

First, despite the argument above that many of today's employees
work in increasingly egalitarian contexts, many people still work in
large, bureaucratic organizations. Dual-strategies theory was initially
devised to describe contexts in which positions of social rank were
determined solely by an individual's ability to garner followers, not on
his/her ability to navigate preexisting institutional hierarchies (Henrich
et al., 2015). Indeed, much of the empirical research on dual-strategies
theory has focused on this context. Additionally, much research on
leadership emergence broadly and dual-strategies theory specifically
assumes that fellow group members elect a leader. However, the reality
of most organizations is that a leader is put into place by people above
them in the organization (or by an external hiring group). How might
leadership selection vary when the person selecting the leader will not

be his/her subordinate? To my knowledge, this question remains un-
answered.

Another area for advancement involves issues of race, gender, and
diversity, which are dramatically different in a modern organization
than they were in the small-scale societies of our evolutionary past. For
example, in small-scale societies thought to characterize the EEA,
groups typically did not have mixed-gender hierarchies (not to say that
women did not have leadership roles, but rather that these leadership
roles tended to be in different domains than men; Garfield et al., 2019).
Similarly, it was uncommon for these groups to have contact with
groups of other races (Cosmides, Tooby, & Kurzban, 2003). It is
therefore unsurprising that dual-strategies theory does not explicitly
theorize about how these strategies interact with gender or race in
organizations. However, gender and race relations in the workplace are
important and salient hierarchies in organizations (Carli & Eagly, 2001;
Sidanius & Pratto, 1999) and these hierarchies are likely navigated
using dominance or prestige-based strategies (Maner & Case, 2016).
Beyond this, however, gender and racial hierarchies are complicated,
nuanced, and distinct from other hierarchies. For example, there is
evidence that dominance is perceived differently based on the leader's
gender (Williams & Tiedens, 2016), race (Livingston & Pearce, 2010),
sexual orientation (Wilson, Remedios, & Rule, 2017), or inter-
sectionality (Livingston, Rosette, & Washington, 2012). Thus, research
on how demographic characteristics such as race, gender, sexual or-
ientation, as well as the intersection of these factors, is likely to provide
important insights beyond the purview of dual-strategies theory.

In a similar vein, the pervasiveness of modern technology can dra-
matically change the dynamics of a work group—for example, how
might dominance and/or prestige manifest themselves in work groups
that primarily work remotely? Dual-strategies theory was developed
with the assumption that groups were co-located and communicated
face-to-face. Given that much of today's work does not follow this
pattern, considering how and when technology impacts these strategies
may be an important next step in the application of dual-strategies
theory to the modern workplace.

Conclusion

While most leadership theories were developed by looking at the
large, stagnant, and bureaucratic organizations of the 20th Century, the
dual-strategies theory of social rank focuses on the informal leader-
follower dynamics that characterize most of human history (Garfield
et al., 2019). Because of its evolutionary origins, the dual-strategies
theory of social rank provides a unique perspective on leadership that is
also surprisingly well-equipped for application to modern workplace
environments. The aim of this review was to provide a guide to un-
derstanding dual-strategies theory in the context of leadership theory
and research and to demonstrate the efficacy of dual-strategies theory
in answering important questions about leadership and hierarchy in
modern organizations. One main conclusion of this review is that future
research that integrates ideas from broader leadership theory into dual-
strategies theory (and/or that explores dual-strategies theory in the
organizational context more explicitly) is likely to improve dual-stra-
tegies theory and provide unique insight into today's evolving organi-
zations.

Acknowledgement

The author would like to thank Jon K. Maner, Charleen R. Case,
Nour S. Kteily and anonymous reviewers for their extremely valuable
feedback, all of which was instrumental in shaping this manuscript. She
would also like to thank Loran F. Nordgren for encouraging her to
develop these ideas and this manuscript.

K.J. McClanahan The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101315

10



References

Acton, B. P., Foti, R. J., Lord, R. G., & Gladfelter, J. A. (2019). Putting emergence back in
leadership emergence: A dynamic, multilevel, process-oriented framework. The
Leadership Quarterly, 30(1), 145–164. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2018.07.002.

Adler, P. S. (1999). Market, hierarchy, and trust: The knowledge economy and the future
of capitalism. Organization Science, 12(2), 215–234. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.
186930.

Anderson, C., Hildreth, J. A. D., & Howland, L. (2015). Is the desire for status a funda-
mental human motive? A review of the empirical literature. Psychological Bulletin,
141(3), 574–601. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0038781.

Anderson, C., & Kilduff, G. J. (2009). Why do dominant personalities attain influence in
face-to-face groups? The competence-signaling effects of trait dominance. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 96(2), 491–503. https://doi.org/10.1037/
a0014201.

Anderson, C., Spataro, S. E., & Flynn, F. J. (2008). Personality and organizational culture
as determinants of influence. The Journal of Applied Psychology, 93(3), 702–710.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.93.3.702.

Anicich, E. M., Fast, N. J., Halevy, N., & Galinsky, A. D. (2016). When the bases of social
hierarchy collide: Power without status drives interpersonal conflict. Organization
Science, 27(1), 123–140. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2015.1019.

Ashford, S. J., Caza, B. B., & Reid, E. M. (2018). From surviving to thriving in the gig
economy: A research agenda for individuals in the new world of work. Research in
Organizational Behavior, 38, 23–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.riob.2018.11.001.

Avolio, B. J., Walumbwa, F. O., & Weber, T. J. (2009). Leadership: Current theories,
research, and future directions. Annual Review of Psychology, 60, 421–449. https://
doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.60.110707.163621.

Bai, F., Ching, G., Ho, C., & Yan, J. (2019). Does virtue lead to status? Testing the moral
virtue theory of status attainment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
https://doi.org/10.1037/pspi0000192.

Barkow, J. H. (1989). Darwin, sex, and status: Biological approaches to mind and culture.
Toronto, CA: University of Toronto Press.

Bass, B. M. (1960). Leadership, psychology, and organizational behavior. Oxford, England:
Harper.

Bass, B. M. (1999). Two decades of research and development in transformational lea-
dership. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 8(1), 9–32. https://
doi.org/10.1080/135943299398410.

Bass, B. M. (2000). The future of leadership in learning organizations. Journal of
Leadership Studies, 7(3), 18–40. https://doi.org/10.1177/107179190000700302.

Bass, B. M., & Bass, R. (2008). The Bass handbook of leadership: Theory, research, and
managerial applications (4th ed.). New York: Free Press.

Bastardoz, N., & van Vugt, M. (2019). The nature of followership: Evolutionary analysis
and review. The Leadership Quarterly, 30(1), 81–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
leaqua.2018.09.004.

Bendersky, C., & Pai, J. (2018). Status dynamics. The Annual Review of Organizational
Psychology and Organizational Behavior, 5, 183–199.

Bendersky, C., & Hays, N. A. (2012). Status conflict in groups. Organization Science, 23(1),
323–340. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1100.0544.

Bendersky, C., & Hays, N. A. (2017). The positive effects of status conflicts in teams where
members perceive status hierarchies differently. Social Psychological and Personality
Science, 8, 124–132. https://doi.org/10.1177/1948550616667614.

Blader, S. L., & Chen, Y. R. (2012). Differentiating the effects of status and power: A
justice perspective. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102(5), 994–1014.
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0026651.

Blader, S. L., & Chen, Y.-R. (2014). What’s in a name? Status, power, and other forms of
social hierarchy. In J. T. Cheng, J. L. Tracy, & C. Anderson (Eds.). The psychology of
social status (pp. 71–95). New York: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-
0867-7_1.

Blake, R. R., & Mouton, J. S. (1964). The managerial grid. Houston, TX: Gulf. .
Boehm, C. (1993). Egalitarian behavior and reverse dominance hierarchy. Current

Anthropology, 34, 227–254.
Boehm, C. (1999). Hierarchy in the forest: The evolution of egalitarian behavior. Cambridge,

MA: Harvard University Press.
Brand, C. O., & Mesoudi, A. (2019). Prestige and dominance based hierarchies exist in

naturally occurring human groups, but are unrelated to task-specific knowledge. Royal
Society Open Science.

Brent, L. J. N., Franks, D. W., Foster, E. A., Balcomb, K. C., Cant, M. A., & Croft, D. P.
(2015). Ecological knowledge, leadership, and the evolution of menopause in killer
whales. Current Biology, 25(6), 746–750. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.01.
037.

Bureau of Labor Statistics (2018). Employee tenure in 2018.
Burns, J. M. (1978). Leadership. New York: Harper & Row.
Buss, D. M. (2005). The handbook of evolutionary psychology. New York: John Wiley &

Sons.
Carli, L. L., & Eagly, A. H. (2001). Gender, hierarchy, and leadership: An introduction.

Journal of Social Issues, 57(4), 629–636.
Case, C. R., Bae, K. K., & Maner, J. K. (2018). To lead or to be liked: When prestige-

oriented leaders prioritize popularity over performance. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 115(4), 657–676. https://doi.org/10.1037/pspi0000138.

Case, C. R., Bae, K. K., & Maner, J. K. (2019). Prestigious and Paranoid: When Leaders are
Hypervigilant to Subtle Signs of Social Disapproval. under review.

Case, C. R., & Maner, J. K. (2014). Divide and conquer: When and why leaders undermine
the cohesive fabric of their group. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 107,
1033–1050.

Castillo, E. A., & Trinh, M. P. (2018). In search of missing time: A review of the study of

time in leadership research. The Leadership Quarterly, 29(1), 165–178. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2017.12.001.

Chapais, B. (2015). Competence and the evolutionary origins of status and power in
humans. Human Nature, 26(2), 161–183. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12110-015-
9227-6.

Cheng, J. T., & Tracy, J. L. (2013). The impact of wealth on prestige and dominance rank
relationships. Psychological Inquiry, 24(2), 102–108. https://doi.org/10.1080/
1047840X.2013.792576.

Cheng, J. T., & Tracy, J. L. (2014). Toward a unified science of hierarchy: Dominance and
prestige are two fundamental pathways to human social rank. In S. Kafashan, A.
Sparks, V. Griskevicius, & P. Barclay (Eds.). The psychology of social status (pp. 3–27).
New York: Springer-Verlag. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-0867-7.

Cheng, J. T., Tracy, J. L., Foulsham, T., Kingstone, A., & Henrich, J. (2013). Two ways to
the top: Evidence that dominance and prestige are distinct yet viable avenues to
social rank and influence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104(1),
103–125. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0030398.

Cheng, J. T., Tracy, J. L., & Henrich, J. (2010). Pride, personality, and the evolutionary
foundations of human social status. Evolution and Human Behavior, 31(5), 334–347.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2010.02.004.

Chudek, M., & Henrich, J. (2011). Culture-gene coevolution, norm-psychology and the
emergence of human prosociality. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 15(5), 218–226.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2011.03.003.

Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1992). Cognitive adaptations for social exchange. In J. Barkow,
L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.). The adapted mindNew York, NY: Oxford University
Press. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2006.1991.

Cosmides, L., Tooby, J., & Kurzban, R. (2003). Perceptions of race. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7(4), 173–179. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613(03)00057-3.

De Cremer, D., & van Vugt, M. (2002). Intergroup and intragroup aspects of leadership in
social dilemmas: A relational model of cooperation. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 38(2), 126–136. https://doi.org/10.1006/jesp.2001.1499.

DeRue, D. S., Nahrgang, J. D., Wellman, N., & Humphrey, S. E. (2011). Trait and beha-
vioral theories of leadership: An integration and meta-analytic test of their relative
validity. Personnel Psychology, 64(1), 7–52. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.
2010.01201.x.

Dinh, J. E., Lord, R. G., Gardner, W. L., Meuser, J. D., Liden, R. C., & Hu, J. (2014).
Leadership theory and research in the new millennium: Current theoretical trends
and changing perspectives. The Leadership Quarterly, 25(1), 36–62. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.leaqua.2013.11.005.

Drews, C. (1993). The concept and definition of dominance in animal behaviour.
Behaviour, 125(3), 283–313.

Einarsen, S., Aasland, M. S., & Skogstad, A. (2007). Destructive leadership behaviour: A
definition and conceptual model. The Leadership Quarterly, 18(3), 207–216. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2007.03.002.

Ensari, N., Riggio, R. E., Christian, J., & Carslaw, G. (2011). Who emerges as a leader?
Meta-analyses of individual differences as predictors of leadership emergence.
Personality and Individual Differences, 51(4), 532–536. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
paid.2011.05.017.

Fast, N. J., Halevy, N., & Galinsky, A. D. (2012). The destructive nature of power without
status. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48(1), 391–394. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jesp.2011.07.013.

Feinberg, M., Willer, R., & Schultz, M. (2014). Gossip and ostracism promote cooperation
in groups. Psychological Science, 25(3), 656–664. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0956797613510184.

Flack, A., Biro, D., Westley, P. A. H., Codling, E. A., Berdahl, A. M., Dell, A. I., & Kao, A. B.
(2018). Collective animal navigation and migratory culture: From theoretical models
to empirical evidence. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences, 373(1746), 20170009. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2017.0009.

Flynn, F. J., Reagans, R. E., Amanatullah, E. T., & Ames, D. R. (2006). Helping one’s way
to the top: Self-monitors achieve status by helping others and knowing who helps
whom. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91(6), 1123–1137. https://doi.
org/10.1037/0022-3514.91.6.1123.

Fortunato, L., & Gavrilets, S. (2014). A solution to the collective action problem in be-
tween-group conflict with within-group inequality. Nature Communications, 5, 1–11.
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms4526.

Galinsky, A. D., Rucker, D. D., & Magee, J. C. (2015). Power: Past findings, present
considerations, and future directions. In APA handbook of personality and social
psychology, Vol. 3: Interpersonal relationships (Vol. 3, pp. 421–460). doi.https://doi.
org/10.1037/14344-016.

Galvin, B. M., Lange, D., & Peterson, S. J. (2012). CEO servant leadership: Exploring
executive characteristics and firm performance. Personnel Psychology, 65(3),
565–596. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.2012.01253.x.

Garfield, Z. H., Hubbard, R. L., & Hagen, E. H. (2019). Evolutionary models of leadership.
Human Nature, 30, 23–58. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12110-019-09338-4.

Garfield, Z. H., von Rueden, C., & Hagen, E. H. (2019). The evolutionary anthropology of
political leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 30(1), 59–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.leaqua.2018.09.001.

Gerstner, C. R., & Day, D. V. (1997). Meta-analytic review of leader-member exchange
theory: Correlates and construct issues. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82(6), 827–844.
https://doi.org/10.1037//0021-9010.82.6.827.

Graen, G. (1976). Role-making processes within complex organizations. In M. D.
Dunnette (Ed.). Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (pp. 1201–1245).
Chicago. IL: Rand-McNally.

Greenleaf, R. K. (2004). Servant leadership: A journey into the nature of legitimate power
and greatness. Business Horizons, 22. https://doi.org/10.1016/0007-6813(79)
90092-2.

Greer, L. L., & van Kleef, G. A. (2010). Equality versus differentiation: The effects of

K.J. McClanahan The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101315

11

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2018.07.002
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.186930
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.186930
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0038781
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0014201
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0014201
https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.93.3.702
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2015.1019
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.riob.2018.11.001
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.60.110707.163621
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.60.110707.163621
https://doi.org/10.1037/pspi0000192
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0055
https://doi.org/10.1080/135943299398410
https://doi.org/10.1080/135943299398410
https://doi.org/10.1177/107179190000700302
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0070
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2018.09.004
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2018.09.004
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0080
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1100.0544
https://doi.org/10.1177/1948550616667614
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0026651
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-0867-7_1
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-0867-7_1
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf8000
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0115
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.01.037
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.01.037
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0140
https://doi.org/10.1037/pspi0000138
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf3030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf3030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0150
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2017.12.001
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2017.12.001
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12110-015-9227-6
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12110-015-9227-6
https://doi.org/10.1080/1047840X.2013.792576
https://doi.org/10.1080/1047840X.2013.792576
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-0867-7
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0030398
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2010.02.004
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2011.03.003
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2006.1991
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613(03)00057-3
https://doi.org/10.1006/jesp.2001.1499
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.2010.01201.x
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.2010.01201.x
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2013.11.005
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2013.11.005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0215
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2007.03.002
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2007.03.002
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2011.05.017
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2011.05.017
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2011.07.013
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2011.07.013
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797613510184
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797613510184
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2017.0009
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.91.6.1123
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.91.6.1123
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms4526
https://doi.org/10.1037/14344-016
https://doi.org/10.1037/14344-016
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.2012.01253.x
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12110-019-09338-4
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2018.09.001
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2018.09.001
https://doi.org/10.1037//0021-9010.82.6.827
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf4000
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf4000
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf4000
https://doi.org/10.1016/0007-6813(79)90092-2
https://doi.org/10.1016/0007-6813(79)90092-2


power dispersion on group interaction. Journal of Applied Psychology, 95(6),
1032–1044. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0020373.

Hagen, E., & Garfield, Z. (2019). Leadership and prestige, mothering, sexual selection, and
encephalization: The computational services model.

Halevy, N., Chou, E. Y., Cohen, T. R., & Livingston, R. W. (2012). Status conferral in
intergroup social dilemmas: Behavioral antecedents and consequences of prestige and
dominance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102(2), 351–366. https://doi.
org/10.1037/a0025515.

Halevy, N., Chou, E. Y., & Livingston, R. W. (2012). Status conferral in intergroup social
dilemmas: Behavioral antecedents and consequences of prestige and dominance.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102(2), 351–366. https://doi.org/10.
1037/a0025515.

Hardy, C. L., & van Vugt, M. (2006). Nice guys finish first: The competitive altruism
hypothesis. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 1402–1413. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0146167206291006.

Harms, P. D., Wood, D., Landay, K., Lester, P. B., & Lester, G. V. (2017). Autocratic leaders
and authoritarian followers revisited: A review and agenda for the future. The
Leadership Quarterly, 29(1), 105–122. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2017.12.007.

Harris, P. (2014). Job hopping is the new normal. Workopolis.
Hays, N. A., & Bendersky, C. (2015). Not all inequality is created equal: Effects of status

versus power hierarchies on competition for upward mobility. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 108(6), 867–882. https://doi.org/10.1037/pspi0000017.

Henderson, D. J., Liden, R. C., Glibkowski, B. C., & Chaudhry, A. (2009). LMX differ-
entiation: A multilevel review and examination of its antecedents and outcomes. The
Leadership Quarterly, 20(4), 517–534. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2009.04.003.

Henrich, J., Chudek, M., & Boyd, R. (2015). The big man mechanism: How prestige fosters
cooperation and creates prosocial leaders. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B, 370. https://doi.org/
10.1098/rstb.2015.0013.

Henrich, J., & Gil-White, F. J. (2001). The evolution of prestige: Freely conferred de-
ference as a mechanism for enhancing the benefits of cultural transmission. Evolution
and Human Behavior, 22(3), 165–196. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1090-5138(00)
00071-4.

Hersey, P. (1985). The situational leader. New York: Warner Books.
Hersey, P., Blanchard, K. H., & Natemeyer, W. E. (1979). Situational leadership, per-

ception, and the impact of power. Group & Organization Management, 4, 418–428.
https://doi.org/10.1177/105960117900400404.

Hess, N. H., & Hagen, E. H. (2019). Gossip, reputation, and friendship in within-group
competition: An evolutionary perspective. In F. Giardini, & R. Wittek (Eds.).
Handbook of reputation and gossip (pp. 275–302). Oxford, England, UK: Oxford
University Press.

Hirschman, A. O. (1970). Exit, voice, and loyalty: Responses to declines in firms, organiza-
tions, and states. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

Hogan, R., & Kaiser, R. B. (2005). What we know about leadership. Review of General
Psychology, 9(2), 169–180. https://doi.org/10.1037/1089-2680.9.2.169.

Horner, V., Proctor, D., Bonnie, K. E., Whiten, A., & de Waal, F. B. M. (2010). Prestige
affects cultural learning in chimpanzees. PLoS One, 5(5), 1–5. https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0010625.

Horowitz, S. (2015). Freelancers in the U.S. workforce. Monthly Labor Review. https://doi.
org/10.21916/mlr.2015.37.

Jiménez, Á., & Mesoudi, A. (2019). Prestige-biased social learning: Current evidence and
outstanding questions. Palgrave Communications, 5(1), 1–12. https://doi.org/10.
1057/s41599-019-0228-7.

Joshi, A., & Knight, A. P. (2014). Who defers to whom and why? Dual pathways linking
demographic differences and dyadic deference to team effectiveness. Academy of
Management Journal. https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2013.0718.

Kakkar, H., & Sivanathan, N. (2017). When the appeal of a dominant leader is greater
than a prestige leader. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(26),
6734–6739. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1617711114.

Kantner, J. (2010). Identifying the pathways to permanent leadership. The evolution of
leadership: Transitions in decision-making from small-scale to middle-range societies
(May).

Karoly, L. A., & Panis, C. W. A. (2004). The 21st century at work: Forces shaping the future
workforce and workplace in the United States.

Kelly, R. L. (2007). The foraging spectrum: Diversity in hunter-gatherer lifeways. Clinton
Corners, NY: Percheron Press.

Kendal, R., Hopper, L. M., Whiten, A., Brosnan, S. F., Lambeth, S. P., Schapiro, S. J., &
Hoppitt, W. (2015). Chimpanzees copy dominant and knowledgeable individuals:
Implications for cultural diversity. Evolution and Human Behavior, 36(1), 65–72.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2014.09.002.

King, A. J., Johnson, D. D. P., & van Vugt, M. (2009). The origins and evolution of lea-
dership. Current Biology, 19(19), R911–R916. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2009.
07.027.

Kirkman, B. L. (2001). The impact of cultural values on job satisfaction and organiza-
tional commitment in self-managing work teams: The mediating role of employee
resistance. Academy of Management Journal, 44(3), 557–569.

Kracke, W. H. (1978). Force and persuasion: Leadership in an Amazonian society. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Lakey, B., Adams, K., Neely, L., Rhodes, G., Lutz, C. J., & Sielky, K. (2002). Perceived
support and low emotional distress: The role of enacted support, dyad similarity, and
provider personality. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28(11), 1546–1555.
https://doi.org/10.1177/014616702237582.

Laustsen, L., & Petersen, M. B. (2015). Does a competent leader make a good friend? Conflict,
ideology and the psychologies of friendship and followership (January)1–43.

Laustsen, L., & Petersen, M. B. (2017). Perceived conflict and leader dominance:
Individual and contextual factors behind preferences for dominant leaders. Political
Psychology, 38(6), 1083–1101. https://doi.org/10.1111/pops.12403.

Levering, R. (2016, March 3). This year's best employers have focused on fairness.
Fortune.

Livingston, R. W., & Pearce, N. A. (2010). The teddy-bear effect: Does having a baby face
benefit black chief executive officers? Psychological Science, 20(10), 1229–1236.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02431.x.

Livingston, R. W., Rosette, A. S., & Washington, E. F. (2012). Can an agentic Black woman
get ahead? The impact of race and interpersonal dominance on perceptions of female
leaders. Psychological Science, 23(4), 354–358. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0956797611428079.

Lord, R. G., Day, D. V., Zaccaro, S. J., Avolio, B. J., & Eagly, A. H. (2017). Leadership in
applied psychology: Three waves of theory and research. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 102(3), 434–451.

Lukaszewski, A. W., Simmons, Z. L., Anderson, C., & Roney, J. R. (2016). The role of
physical formidability in human social status allocation. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 110(3), 385–406. https://doi.org/10.1037/pspi0000042.

Magee, J. C., & Galinsky, A. D. (2008). Social hierarchy: The self-reinforcing nature of
power and status. Academy of Management Annals, 2, 1–79.

Maner, J. K. (2016, December 5). Good bosses switch between two leadership styles.
Harvard Business Review. https://hbr.org/2016/12/good-bosses-switch-between-two-
leadership-styles.

Maner, J. K. (2017). Dominance and prestige: A tale of two hierarchies. Current Directions
in Psychological Science, 26, 526–531. https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721417714323.

Maner, J. K., & Case, C. R. (2016). Dominance and prestige: Dual strategies for navigating
social hierarchies. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 3, 1–52. https://doi.
org/10.1016/bs.aesp.2016.02.001.

Maner, J. K., & Mead, N. L. (2010). The essential tension between leadership and power:
When leaders sacrifice group goals for the sake of self-interest. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 99(3), 482–497. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0018559.

Marschan, R., Welch, D., & Welch, L. (1996). Control in less-hierarchical multinationals:
The role of personal networks and informal communication. International Business
Review, 5(2), 137–150. https://doi.org/10.1016/0969-5931(96)00002-9.

Martin, R., Guillaume, Y., Thomas, G., Lee, A., & Epitropaki, O. (2016). Leader–member
exchange (LMX) and performance: A meta-analytic review. Personnel Psychology,
69(1), 67–121. https://doi.org/10.1111/peps.12100.

McClanahan, K. J., Maner. J., K., Cheng, J. T., Carswell, K., & Craig, J. (2019). Dominance
and prestige over time (and outside the lab). (Manuscript in progress retrieved from
osf.io/rw6kp).

Northouse, P. G. (2018). Leadership: Theory and practice. Sage (New: Sage.).
Oc, B. (2018). Contextual leadership: A systematic review of how contextual factors shape

leadership and its outcomes. The Leadership Quarterly, 29(1), 218–235. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2017.12.004.

Payne, Κ. (2003). Sources of social complexity in the three elephant species. In F. B. M. de
Waal, & P. L. Tyack (Eds.). Animal social complexity: Intelligence, culture, and in-
dividualized societies (pp. 57–85). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. https://
doi.org/10.4159/harvard.9780674419131.c5.

Peterson, N. (1993). Demand sharing: Reciprocity and the pressure for generosity among
foragers. American Anthropologist, 95(4), 860–874.

Petriglieri, G., Ashford, S. J., & Wrzesniewski, A. (2018a). Thriving in the gig economy.
Harvard Business Review, 96(2), 140–143.

Petriglieri, G., Ashford, S. J., & Wrzesniewski, A. (2018b). Agony and ecstasy in the gig
economy: Cultivating holding environments for precarious and personalized work
identities. Administrative Science Quarterly, 1–47. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0001839218759646.

Podolny, J. M., & Baron, J. N. (1997). Resources and relationships: Social networks and
mobility in the workplace. American Sociological Review, 62(5), 673–693.

Price, M. E., & van Vugt, M. (2014). The evolution of leader–follower reciprocity: The
theory of service-for-prestige. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 1–17. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00363.

Project Management Institute (2017). Success rates rise: 2017 global project management
survey. PMI’s Pulse of the Profession.

Redhead, D. J., O’Gorman, R., Cheng, J. T., Driver, C., & Foulsham, T. (2019). On the
dynamics of social hierarchy: A longitudinal empirical investigation of the rise and
fall of prestige, dominance, and social rank in naturalistic task groups. Evolution and
Human Behavior, 40(2), 222–234 (1090513818302289).

Richerson, P., & Henrich, J. (2012). Tribal social instincts and the cultural evolution of
institutions to solve collective action problems. Cliodynamics, 3(1), 38–80. https://
doi.org/10.21237/C7clio3112453.

Richerson, P., Newton, E. K., Baldini, R., Bell, A. V., Newson, L., Demps, K., & Zefferman,
M. (2016). Cultural group selection plays an essential role in explaining human co-
operation: A sketch of the evidence. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 39, 1–68. https://
doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X1400106X.

Ronay, R., Maddux, W. W., & von Hippel, W. (2018). Inequality rules: Resource dis-
tribution and the evolution of dominance- and prestige-based leadership. Leadership
Quarterlyhttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2018.04.004.

Ronay, R., Oostrom, J. K., & Maner, J. K. (2019). Two ways to the top, one way back down:
Dominant (but not prestigious) leaders elicit coalitional challenges from followers. (under
review).

Rosenfeld, J. (2014). What unions no longer do. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Sahlins, M. D. (1963). Poor man, rich man, big-man, chief: Political types in Melanesia

and Polynesia. Comparative Studies in Society and History, 5(3), 285–303.
Schmitt, D. P., & Pilcher, J. J. (2004). Evaluating evidence of psychological adaptation:

How do we know one when we see one? Psychological Science, 15(10), 643–649.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0956-7976.2004.00734.x.

Schriesheim, C. A., Castro, S. L., & Cogliser, C. C. (1999). Leader-member exchange (LMX)
research: A comprehensive review of theory, measurement, and data-analytic prac-
tices. The Leadership Quarterly, 10(1), 63–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1048-

K.J. McClanahan The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101315

12

https://doi.org/10.1037/a0020373
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0285
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0025515
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0025515
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0025515
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0025515
https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167206291006
https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167206291006
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2017.12.007
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0310
https://doi.org/10.1037/pspi0000017
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2009.04.003
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2015.0013
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2015.0013
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1090-5138(00)00071-4
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1090-5138(00)00071-4
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0335
https://doi.org/10.1177/105960117900400404
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0350
https://doi.org/10.1037/1089-2680.9.2.169
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0010625
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0010625
https://doi.org/10.21916/mlr.2015.37
https://doi.org/10.21916/mlr.2015.37
https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0228-7
https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0228-7
https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2013.0718
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1617711114
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0395
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2014.09.002
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2009.07.027
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2009.07.027
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0415
https://doi.org/10.1177/014616702237582
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0425
https://doi.org/10.1111/pops.12403
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0435
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02431.x
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797611428079
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797611428079
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0450
https://doi.org/10.1037/pspi0000042
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0460
https://hbr.org/2016/12/good-bosses-switch-between-two-leadership-styles
https://hbr.org/2016/12/good-bosses-switch-between-two-leadership-styles
https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721417714323
https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.aesp.2016.02.001
https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.aesp.2016.02.001
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0018559
https://doi.org/10.1016/0969-5931(96)00002-9
https://doi.org/10.1111/peps.12100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0495
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2017.12.004
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2017.12.004
https://doi.org/10.4159/harvard.9780674419131.c5
https://doi.org/10.4159/harvard.9780674419131.c5
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0515
https://doi.org/10.1177/0001839218759646
https://doi.org/10.1177/0001839218759646
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0525
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00363
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00363
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0535
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0540
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0540
https://doi.org/10.21237/C7clio3112453
https://doi.org/10.21237/C7clio3112453
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X1400106X
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X1400106X
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2018.04.004
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0560
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0565
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0570
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0570
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0956-7976.2004.00734.x
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1048-9843(99)80009-5


9843(99)80009-5.
Sidanius, J., & Pratto, F. (1999). Social dominance: An intergroup theory of social hierarchy

and oppression. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
Sparrowe, R. T. (2018). LMX and welfare trade-off ratios: An evolutionary perspective on

leader-member relations. Leadership Quarterly, (October), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.leaqua.2018.11.001.

Spisak, B. R., Blaker, N. M., Lefevre, C. E., Moore, F. R., & Krebbers, K. F. B. (2014). A face
for all seasons: Searching for context-specific leadership traits and discovering a
general preference for perceived health. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience,
8(November), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00792.

Stewart, T. (1998). Intellectual capital: The new wealth of organizations. New York, NY:
Crown Business.

Stogdill, R. M. (1948). Personal factors associated with leadership: A survey of the lit-
erature. The Journal of Psychology, 25(1), 35–71. https://doi.org/10.1080/00223980.
1948.9917362.

Stone, A. G., Russell, R. F., & Patterson, K. (2004). Transformational versus servant lea-
dership: A difference in leader focus. Leadership & Organization Development Journal,
25(4), 349–361. https://doi.org/10.1108/01437730410538671.

Symons, D. (1992). On the use and misuse of Darwinism in the study of human behavior.
In J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.). The adapted mind: Evolutionary
psychology and the generation of culture (pp. 137–159). New York, NY, US: Oxford
University Press.

Tepper, B. J. (2000). Consequences of abustive supervision. Academy of Management
Journal, 43(2), 178–190. https://doi.org/10.2307/1556343.

Tiedens, L. Z., Unzueta, M. M., & Young, M. J. (2007). An unconscious desire for hier-
archy? The motivated perception of dominance complementarity in task partners.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 93, 402–414. https://doi.org/10.1037/
0022-3514.93.3.402.

Tiger, L., & Fox, R. (1972). The imperial animal. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1990). The past explains the present: Emotional adaptation and

the structure of ancestral environments. Ethology and Sociobiology, 11(4–5), 375–424.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0162-3095(90)90017-z.

Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1992). The psychological foundations of culture. In J. H.
Barkow, L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.). The adapted mind: Evolutionary psychology and
the generation of culture (pp. 19–136). New York: Oxford University Press. https://doi.
org/10.4324/9781410608994.

Van Berkel, L., Crandall, C. S., Eidelman, S., & Blanchar, J. C. (2015). Hierarchy, dom-
inance, and deliberation: Egalitarian values require mental effort. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 41(9), 1207–1222. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0146167215591961.

van Dierendonck, D. (2011). Servant leadership: A review and synthesis. Journal of
Management, 37(4), 1228–1261. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206310380462.

van Dierendonck, D., & Patterson, K. (2015). Compassionate love as a cornerstone of
servant leadership: An integration of previous theorizing and research. Journal of
Business Ethics, 128(1), 119–131. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-014-2085-z.

van Vugt, M., & Grabo, A. E. (2015). The many faces of leadership: An evolutionary-
psychology approach. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 24(6), 484–489.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721415601971.

van Vugt, M., Hogan, R., & Kaiser, R. B. (2008). Leadership, followership, and evolution:
Some lessons from the past. The American Psychologist, 63(3), 182–196. https://doi.
org/10.1037/0003-066X.63.3.182.

von Rueden, C. (2014). The roots and fruits of social status in small-scale human societies.
In J. T. Cheng, J. L. Tracy, & C. Anderson (Eds.). The psychology of social status (pp. 1–
365). . https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-0867-7_1.

von Rueden, C., & Gurven, M. (2012). When the strong punish: Why net costs of are often
negligible. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 35(1), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0140525X11000069.

von Rueden, C., & van Vugt, M. (2015). Leadership in small-scale societies: Some im-
plications for theory, research, and practice. The Leadership Quarterly, 26, 978–990.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2015.10.004.

Wang, G., Oh, I.-S., Courtright, S. H., & Colbert, A. E. (2011). Transformational leadership
and performance across criteria and levels: A meta-analytic review of 25 years of
research. Group & Organization Management, 36(2), 223–270. https://doi.org/10.
1177/1059601111401017.

Wellman, N. (2017). Authority or community? A relational models theory of group-level
leadership emergence. Academy of Management Review, 42(4), 596–617.

Willer, R. (2009). Groups reward individual sacrifice: The status solution to the collective
action problem. American Sociological Review, 74(1), 23–43.

Willer, R., Youngreen, R., Troyer, L., & Lovaglia, M. J. (2012). How do the powerful attain
status? The roots of legitimate power inequalities. Managerial and Decision Economics,
33(August), 355–367. https://doi.org/10.1002/mde.

Williams, M. J., & Tiedens, L. Z. (2016). The subtle suspension of backlash: A meta-
analysis of penalties for women’s implicit and explicit dominance behavior.
Psychological Bulletin, 142(2), 165–197.

Wilson, J. P., Remedios, J. D., & Rule, N. O. (2017). Interactive effects of obvious and
ambiguous social categories on perceptions of leadership: When double-minority
status may be beneficial. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 43(6), 888–900.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167217702373.

Witkower, Z., Tracy, J. L., Cheng, J. T., & Henrich, J. (2019). Two signals of social rank:
Prestige and dominance are associated with distinct nonverbal displays. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology.

Woodburn, J. (2011). Egalitarian societies. Man, 17(3), 431–451.
Wu, J., Balliet, D., & Van Lange, P. A. M. (2016). Gossip versus punishment: The effi-

ciency of reputation to promote and maintain cooperation. Scientific Reports,
6(March), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep23919.

Zhang, Z., Waldman, D. A., & Wang, Z. (2012). A multilevel investigation of leader-
member exchange, informal leader emergence, and individual and team perfor-
mance. Personnel Psychology, 65(1), 49–78. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.
2011.01238.x.

K.J. McClanahan The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101315

13

https://doi.org/10.1016/S1048-9843(99)80009-5
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0585
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0585
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2018.11.001
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2018.11.001
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00792
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0600
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0600
https://doi.org/10.1080/00223980.1948.9917362
https://doi.org/10.1080/00223980.1948.9917362
https://doi.org/10.1108/01437730410538671
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf9000
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf9000
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf9000
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf9000
https://doi.org/10.2307/1556343
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.93.3.402
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.93.3.402
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0625
https://doi.org/10.1016/0162-3095(90)90017-z
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781410608994
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781410608994
https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167215591961
https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167215591961
https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206310380462
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-014-2085-z
https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721415601971
https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.63.3.182
https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.63.3.182
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-0867-7_1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X11000069
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X11000069
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2015.10.004
https://doi.org/10.1177/1059601111401017
https://doi.org/10.1177/1059601111401017
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0685
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0685
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0690
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0690
https://doi.org/10.1002/mde
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0700
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0700
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0700
https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167217702373
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0710
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0710
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0710
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1048-9843(18)30839-7/rf0715
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep23919
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.2011.01238.x
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.2011.01238.x

